0 | Event: Archduke Franz Ferdinand of the Austro-Hungarian Empire is assassinated in Sarajevo | Date: 1914-06-28 | Tag: assassinations, wwi | Description: Franz Ferdinand and his wife, Sophie the Duchess of Hohenburg, are killed by Bosnian Serb nationalist Gavrilo Princip. The Austrian government suspects that Serbia is responsible.
1 | Event: Austria-Hungary declares war on Serbia. World War I begins | Date: 1914-07-28 | Tag: declarations, invasions, wwi | Description: This is a dark day and a dark hour. The sword is being forced into my hand. This war will demand of us enormous sacrifice in life and money, but we shall show our foes what it is to provoke Germany. Kaiser Wilhelm II, July 31, 1914
2 | Event: In one month, the world erupts in war | Date: 1914-08-01 | Tag: invasions, declarations, wwi | Description: August 1st, 1914 Germany declares war on Russia Germany and Turkey sign alliance France mobilizes in support of Russia. August 2nd, 1914 Germany invades Luxembourg. August 3rd, 1914 Germany declares war on France. August 4th, 1914 Germany declares war on Belgium Britain declares war on Germany United States declares neutrality.August 10th, 1914 France declares war on Austria-Hungary. August 11th, 1914 Montenegro declares war on Germany. August 12th, 1914 Britain declares war on Austria-Hungary. August 23rd, 1914 Germany invades France Austria-Hungary invades Russian Poland. Japan declares war on Germany. August 27th, 1914 Austria-Hungary declares war on Belgium.
3 | Event: Russians are defeated at Battle of Tannenberg | Date: 1914-08-26 | Tag: battles, wwi | Description: On the eastern front, Germans shatter the Russian Second Army and take over 92,000 prisoners at the Battle of Tannenberg.
4 | Event: Germans conduct air raid on Paris | Date: 1914-08-30 | Tag: attacks, operations, wwi | Description: The attack has little military value, but is intended to terrorize civilians.
5 | Event: Germans stopped at First Battle of the Marne | Date: 1914-09-05 | Tag: battles, invasions, wwi | Description: German invasion of France is stopped in the First Battle of the Marne as German troops are forced to the north side of the Marne River, causing the the Schlieffen Plan to fail.
6 | Event: Commission for Relief in Belgium Founded | Date: 1914-10-01 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: October 1914: Responding to need, the Commission for Relief in Belgium (CRB) is created by Herbert Hoover, who is at the time a mining engineer and consultant living in London. The CRB distributes millions of tons of food to civilians in Belgium and northern France. Hoover goes on to be appointed director of the U.S. Food Administration in 1917 by President Wilson.
7 | Event: In First Battle of Ypres, entrenched Allies fight off German assault | Date: 1914-10-31 | Tag: battles, wwi | Description: As the armies tried to out flank each other, they extended their lines to the English Channel and began trench warfare. Ypres, a Belgian city and communications hub, was essential to both sides. In the First Battle of Ypres, entrenched Allies fight off German assault. Germans give up their offensive by November 24 as winter and stormy weather set in.
8 | Event: Japan attacks and captures Tsingtao, China | Date: 1914-10-31 | Tag: attacks, invasions, wwi | Description: Held by the Germans since 1898, Tsingtao is a lightly garrisoned port city on the Yellow Sea.  The Germans surrender on November 6.
9 | Event: Christmas Truce Observed on Western Front | Date: 1914-12-25 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: The sound of Christmas carols across No Man's Land encourages troops from both sides to exchange greetings. The truce is spontaneous and was experienced by hundreds, perhaps thousands, of soldiers.
10 | Event: Bread rationing is introduced in Germany | Date: 1915-01-01 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: Each citizen and neutral foreign national is issued a bread card for an initial daily quota of 225 grams (about 8 ounces).
11 | Event: Turkish army disarms its Armenian troops | Date: 1915-02-01 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwi | Description: Ottoman Turkish army disarms and segregates Armenian soldiers into labor battalions fearing Christian Armenians are aiding Orthodox Russians in their fight against Turkey. In 1915, 1,000,000 Armenians are forcibly removed to Syria and Mesopotamia.
12 | Event: German saboteurs at work in America | Date: 1915-02-02 | Tag: attacks, operations, wwi | Description: A German officer, Werner Horn, is arrested in Maine for a bombing that damages the Saint Croix-Vanceboro Railway Bridge, which connects the U.S. and Canada.
13 | Event: Germany threatens submarine warfare against merchant vessels | Date: 1915-02-04 | Tag: attacks, threats, wwi | Description: Germany warns that neutral vessels in British waters "would be destroyed without it always being possible to warn the crews and passengers."
14 | Event: German women demonstrate for peace | Date: 1915-03-18 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: Several thousand women demonstrate for peace before the German Reichstag [Parliament].
15 | Event: In Second Battle of Ypres, Germans use poison gas | Date: 1915-04-22 | Tag: battles, attacks, wwi | Description: In the Second Battle of Ypres, the Germans open the assault with a chlorine gas attack, the first successful use of poison gas on the Western Front; more than 10,000 Allied troops are affected, over half of whom died. By May 25, the Allies withdraw. The effects of a gas attack are vividly described in Wilfred Owen"s poem,
16 | Event: Allies land in Gallipoli, Turkey | Date: 1915-04-25 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwi | Description: Allies, including Australian and New Zealand troops, land in Gallipoli, Turkey at Helles and Anzac Cove. The Turkish controlled peninsula of twisting shorelines protects the Dardanelle Straits- a key international waterway connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Black Sea.
17 | Event: German U-boat torpedoes the Lusitania | Date: 1915-05-07 | Tag: attacks, assassinations, wwi | Description: The Cunard passenger ship Lusitania sinks in British waters. It was attacked by German U-boat U-20, commanded by Kapitanleutnant Walther Schwieger. A total of 1,198 drown, including many women and children and 128 U.S. citizens. Germans will end unlimited submarine warfare on passenger liners on September 1, 1915 because of worldwide outrage at this attack on civilian shipping.
18 | Event: Third Allied offensive on Gallipoli fails | Date: 1915-06-04 | Tag: battles, operations, wwi | Description: A final attempt by Allied troops to take Krithia, a coastal city in Turkey, is unsuccessful. Field Marshal Kitchener decides to send three additional divisions as reinforcements. The Turks also bring in additional troops.
19 | Event: German forces in South-West Africa surrender to General Botha of South Africa | Date: 1915-07-09 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwi | Description: A six-month campaign conquers the German colony, capturing its wireless stations and strategic harbors.
20 | Event: In London, women demonstrate for the right to work in war industries | Date: 1915-07-17 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: In London, women demonstrate for the right to work in war industries with banners proclaiming: "Women Demand the Right to Serve" and "The Situation is Serious " Women Must Help To Save It."
21 | Event: Allied troops enter Kut-al-Amara in Mesopotamia | Date: 1915-09-28 | Tag: invasions, wwi | Description: British and Indian forces move up the Tigris River to capture Kut-al-Amara in Mesopotamia from Turkish forces. Their ultimate goal is Baghdad, roughly 100 miles from present-day Baghdad in Iraq.  They will surrender their forces in April, 1916.
22 | Event: Serbia is invaded by Germany, Austria and Bulgaria | Date: 1915-10-06 | Tag: invasions, battles, wwi | Description: The Central Powers troops cross the Danube River and within days capture Belgrade. A massive Serbian retreat follows. Soldiers and their families made their way to the Albanian border through mountains and a steady snowfall.
23 | Event: British nurse Edith Cavell is executed | Date: 1915-10-12 | Tag: assassinations, wwi | Description: British nurse Edith Cavell, a nursing instructor working with the Red Cross, is shot by Germans at 7 a.m. under accusations of being a spy and helping Allied soldiers escape Belgium. She was charged with espionage five days after her execution.
24 | Event: Germans begin Battle of Verdun with heavy artillery barrage | Date: 1916-02-21 | Tag: battles, attacks, wwi | Description: The German code name for the attack in the Meuse region of France (toward the direction of Verdun) is Gericht, "place of execution." Verdun becomes the symbol of France"s determination to defend its national pride and honor. "They shall not pass" (On ne passe pas) becomes the battle cry. The battle of Verdun would continue for the rest of the year.
25 | Event: Marie Curie involved in the war effort | Date: 1916-04-01 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: Marie Curie helps to equip ambulances with X-ray equipment so wounded soldiers at the front can receive immediate care.
26 | Event: The Escadrille Americaine, later the Lafayette Escadrille, is formed | Date: 1916-04-01 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: This French Army flying unit is composed mostly of American volunteers. Thirty-eight Americans serve in the Lafayette Escadrille and are credited with 57 victories.
27 | Event: Belgians deported to Germany as forced labor | Date: 1916-04-22 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwi | Description: German troops begin to round up Belgian workers for deportation to Germany. They are assembled in daily batches of 1,400 men and women in equal numbers.
28 | Event: Anti-war demonstrations take place in Germany | Date: 1916-05-01 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: Anti-war demonstrations take place in Berlin, Jena, Dresden and other German cities.
29 | Event: ANZACs arrive in France | Date: 1916-05-08 | Tag: invasions, wwi | Description: The ANZACs are troops from the British Commonwealth countries of Australia and New Zealand.
30 | Event: Submarine warfare is suspended | Date: 1916-05-10 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: After the March 24 sinking of the passenger ship, Sussex, Woodrow Wilson again threatened breaking off relations with Germany. To avert the threat of America entering the war on the side of the Allies, the Germans call off their campaign of unrestricted submarine warfare.
31 | Event: Secret pact divides Middle East between British and French interests | Date: 1916-05-16 | Tag: developments, agreements, wwi | Description: The Sykes-Picot Agreement undermines Arab hopes for independence. Syria and Lebanon are placed in the French orbit, while Britain claims Jordan, Iraq, the Gulf states and the Palestinian Mandate.
32 | Event: German and British navies clash in the Battle of Jutland | Date: 1916-05-31 | Tag: battles, wwi | Description: Off the coast of Denmark, the Germans try to break through the British blockade of German ports. In the two-day battle, the British lose 111,980 tons of shipping with 6,945 casualties. The Germans lose 62,233 tons of shipping with 2,921 casualties. Each side claims victory.
33 | Event: Arab revolt in the Hejaz begins | Date: 1916-06-05 | Tag: invasions, attacks, wwi | Description: The "Great Arab Rising", a nationalist rise to throw off Ottoman rule, is led by Sherif Hussein of Mecca, King of the Hedjaz, and his son Emir Feisal. Mecca, Medina and Jeddah come under attack.
34 | Event: The Battle of the Somme begins | Date: 1916-06-24 | Tag: battles, attacks, wwi | Description: In an effort to draw German troops away from Verdun, the Allies mount a major offensive that opens with a large-scale artillery barrage that lasts five days. In one day, as German machine gunners rake the advancing troops, 20,000 British are killed and 40,000 more wounded.  The devastating Battle of the Somme will continue through the summer and end in November.  The British gain is a modest six miles.  The casualty count is horrific: 419,000 British, 194,000 French and 650,000 Germans.
35 | Event: British use tanks for the first time at Somme | Date: 1916-09-15 | Tag: battles, developments, wwi | Description: Thirty-six tanks are secretly shipped to the front and used in the Battle of Flers-Courcelette, near the Somme. However, mechanical malfunctions and inexperienced crews greatly hampered the tanks" effectiveness.
36 | Event: Armenian massacres denounced in Reichstag | Date: 1916-09-29 | Tag: trials, wwi | Description: News of Armenian massacres began to surface in Europe and America in August of 1915, and began causing outrage and alarm. Nearly a year later, these events were addressed within the German government by Dr. Siegfried Heckscher as he spoke to the Reichstag stating: "The massacres in Armenia have had a most fearful effect. They work against us, especially in America. Couldn"t we have prevented them?"
37 | Event: U.S. President Wilson is reelected | Date: 1916-11-07 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: The Democrats run on the slogan, "He kept us out of war." The Republican candidate, Charles Evans Hughes, is perceived as a warmonger and loses the election.
38 | Event: United States is alerted about the Zimmermann Telegram, which reveals German plot against America | Date: 1917-03-01 | Tag: developments, operations, wwi | Description: On March 1, 1917, the American public learned about a German proposal to ally with Mexico if the United States entered the war. Months earlier, British intelligence had intercepted a secret message from German Foreign Minister Arthur Zimmermann to the Mexican government, inviting an alliance (along with Japan) that would recover the southwestern states Mexico lost to the U.S. during the Mexican War of 1846-47.
39 | Event: The British enter Baghdad | Date: 1917-03-11 | Tag: invasions, battles, wwi | Description: Supported by British gunboats traveling up the Tigris River, Anglo-Indian troops continue their advance toward Baghdad; upon arrival they discover the Turks have abandoned the city. Mesopotamia is under British control.
40 | Event: German U-boat sinks the S.S. Aztec | Date: 1917-04-01 | Tag: attacks, invasions, wwi | Description: The American steamer Aztec is torpedoed without warning by a German U-boat as it enters British waters. Twenty-eight Americans drown.
41 | Event: President Wilson delivers his war message to Congress. | Date: 1917-04-02 | Tag: conferences, wwi | Description: President Wilson delivers his war message in a historic joint session of the House and Senate, stating that the world must be made "safe for democracy" and asks for a declaration of war.
42 | Event: The United States declares war on Germany | Date: 1917-04-06 | Tag: declarations, wwi | Description: The day after an overwhelming majority in the Senate votes for war, President Wilson signs the declaration. The United States quickly puts the entire country on the road to war. Going from a standing army of 133,000 men with almost no heavy artillery pieces, millions of men were inducted into the armed forces over the next two years and given basic combat training.
43 | Event: Lenin arrives in Petrograd, Russia | Date: 1917-04-16 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: Germans smuggle Vladimir Lenin, leader of the Bolsheviks, back into Russia from his exile in Switzerland, hoping he can spur a mass strike of Russian workers.
44 | Event: Mutinies roil the French Army | Date: 1917-04-29 | Tag: battles, mutinies, wwi | Description: Long periods in the front line without relief and multiple military setbacks, including a disastrous and failed aggressive assault on the German line, cause thousands of troops to mutiny. For nearly a month, troops will defend but not attack. Of the 22,385 found guilty of mutiny, 55 are recorded as shot.
45 | Event: English workers call strikes | Date: 1917-05-01 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: Over 250,000 engineers protest long hours, low wages, and shortages of food and fuel.
46 | Event: Herbert Hoover is appointed head of the U.S. Food Administration | Date: 1917-05-05 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: Herbert Hoover calls on Americans to help the war effort and save food; his program is voluntary and does not impose any regulations or rationing.  He states, "The whole foundation of democracy lies in the individual initiative of its people and their willingness to serve the interests of the nation with complete self-effacement in the time of emergency." "Herbert Hoover, May 5, 1917
47 | Event: The concept of Total War becomes reality | Date: 1917-05-25 | Tag: attacks, battles, wwi | Description: Folkestone, England is bombed by German Gotha airplanes leading to 95 civilian casualties while 195 are injured. The concept of strategic bombing of civilian targets introduces the reality of "Total War" (Totalen Krieg) to England and the world.
48 | Event: Millions of American men register for service on the first day of the draft | Date: 1917-06-05 | Tag: operations, wwi | Description: On the first day of the draft, millions of American men register for service under the Selective Service Act signed on May 18. Throughout the country, 9,586,508 men, ages 21 to 31, register at their local draft boards; in many places they are greeted by military bands and cheering onlookers.
49 | Event: Congress enacts the Espionage Act | Date: 1917-06-15 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: The new law allows the government to censor publications sent through the mail; it makes it a crime to aid enemy nations or interfere with the draft.
50 | Event: First American Troops Land in France | Date: 1917-06-25 | Tag: invasions, wwi | Description: Heywood Broun, a correspondent with the American Expeditionary Forces, stated, "American blacks in stevedore service were the first American arrivals in France in June 1917. They had been outfitted with old overcoats of the period shortly after the Civil War: blue coats with gold buttons and a lining of crimson." Serving in segregated units and primarily assigned to manual labor, African American men and women defended democracy overseas, while not receiving the full rights of citizenship at home. The 369 th Infantry, also known as the Black Rattlers, will have the distinction of serving the longest frontline service (191 days in trenches) of any American regiment and will be awarded the French Croix de Guerre.
51 | Event: First American Troops Land in France | Date: 1917-06-25 | Tag: invasions, wwi | Description: General John J. Pershing, Commander-in-Chief of the American Expeditionary Forces (AEF), greets the infantrymen and engineers as they step ashore. "They are sturdy rookies - we shall make great soldiers of them," he is reported to have said.
52 | Event: George V renounces his German heritage | Date: 1917-07-17 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: The King of Great Britain gives up all of his German titles and formal associations with the House of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha and renames his dynasty "the House of Windsor."
53 | Event: First American draftees are chosen by lottery | Date: 1917-07-20 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: In Washington, D.C., a blindfolded Secretary of War Newton D. Baker draws the first capsules from a large fishbowl in a lottery for the first American draftees, as prescribed under the Selective Service Act.
54 | Event: British launch Third Battle of Ypres against the Germans | Date: 1917-07-31 | Tag: battles, attacks, wwi | Description: In the first two weeks of battle, British artillery units fire 4,283,550 shells at German lines near the Flemish town of Passchendaele. The campaign ends by Nov. 10.
55 | Event: German sailors mutiny | Date: 1917-08-02 | Tag: battles, assassinations, wwi | Description: Battleship crews protest poor food and living conditions. On September 9, the mutiny is revealed to the Reichstag and two of the mutiny"s leaders are executed days later.
56 | Event: Suffragists are arrested at the White House | Date: 1917-08-28 | Tag: trials, wwi | Description: Ten suffragists are arrested at the White House for carrying placards demanding the right to vote for women. Four of the demonstrators are sentenced to prison.
57 | Event: First American Combat Soldiers Killed | Date: 1917-10-21 | Tag: battles, wwi | Description: Soldiers of the First Division enter combat on the Western Front under French command. It is less than two weeks later, on Nov. 1, when First American soldiers, members of the 1st Division, are killed in action: James Gresham, Merle D. Hay and Thomas F. Enright
58 | Event: The Balfour Declaration is presented in London | Date: 1917-11-02 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: Named for its author Lord Balfour, the declaration expresses the British government"s support of the establishment of "a national home for the Jewish people" in Palestine.
59 | Event: Bolsheviks seize power in Russia | Date: 1917-11-07 | Tag: invasions, wwi | Description: Less than two months after being declared a "socialist republic", Lenin"s forces succeed in overthrowing the Kerensky government. The Bolsheviks demand a "just and immediate peace."
60 | Event: British tanks gain victory at Cambrai on the Western Front | Date: 1917-11-20 | Tag: battles, operations, wwi | Description: The Germans are taken by surprise since no artillery barrage precedes the attack. The tanks penetrate the lines by more than 10,000 yards. Ten days later, the Germans counterattack, regaining most ground lost.
61 | Event: Explosion of munitions ship decimates city of Halifax, Nova Scotia | Date: 1917-12-06 | Tag: attacks, developments, wwi | Description: A French ship carrying a full cargo of munitions explodes when it collides with a Belgian relief ship. Over 2,000 people are killed and 9,000 injured.
62 | Event: The British capture Jerusalem from the Turks | Date: 1917-12-09 | Tag: battles, operations, wwi | Description: Church bells ring in London for the first time since the start of the war to celebrate the victory. Prime Minister Lloyd George had tasked General Allenby with capturing Jerusalem by Christmas. Allenby achieved his objective weeks ahead of schedule, dealing a devastating blow to Turkish forces.  achieved his objective weeks ahead of schedule, dealing a devastating blow to Turkish forces.
63 | Event: U.S. Congress passes `prohibition` amendment | Date: 1917-12-18 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: The Eighteenth Amendment outlaws the manufacture, sale, and transportation of alcoholic liquors. The law is sent to the states for ratification.
64 | Event: President Wilson outlines his Fourteen Points | Date: 1918-01-08 | Tag: conferences, developments, wwi | Description: The peace plan includes independence for Poland, restoration of Belgian independence, the return of Alsace-Lorraine to France, an end to secret diplomacy, autonomy of subject nationalities and the formation of a League of Nations.
65 | Event: Treaty of Brest-Litovsk is signed between Russia and Germany | Date: 1918-03-03 | Tag: conferences, developments, wwi | Description: Treaty of Brest-Litovsk is signed by Soviet Russia and Germany. Germany sets harsh terms: Russia yields 34% of her population, 32% of her farmland, 50% of her industrial holdings and 90% of her coalmines. Bolshevik negotiator, Leon Trotsky, laments; "This is a peace that Russia, grinding her teeth, is forced to accept."
66 | Event: First report of influenza at Camp Funston (Ft. Riley) Kansas | Date: 1918-03-08 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: The disease, known as the "Spanish flu," spreads through contact or close proximity to infected persons. It is carried from the U.S. overseas on troop ships to the Western Front and then throughout the world. Over the next year, 550,000 Americans will die from the disease and more than 20 million worldwide.
67 | Event: The U.S. begins daylight saving time | Date: 1918-03-31 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: Clocks are set forward one hour. The Congressional Act for "saving" daylight accompanies food, fuel, and other conservation programs. Canada joins the U.S. in saving daylight on April 15.
68 | Event: Americans prevail in Battle of Cantigny | Date: 1918-05-28 | Tag: battles, attacks, wwi | Description: The U.S. 1st Division"s 28th Infantry Regiment mounts an assault on the German observation strongpoint in broad daylight. Within thirty-five minutes, the Doughboys have the village. The next day, desperate German counterattacks fail to dislodge the Americans.
69 | Event: U.S. Marines launch attack at Belleau Wood | Date: 1918-06-06 | Tag: battles, attacks, wwi | Description: At Belleau Wood, U.S. Marines launch an attack against German storm troopers. Two battalions of Marines, along with army engineers and infantry, confront German storm troopers in a seesaw battle that continues through the month of June.
70 | Event: U.S. Navy begins laying mines in the North Sea Mine Barrage | Date: 1918-06-08 | Tag: operations, attacks, wwi | Description: By war"s end, the U.S. Navy places a total of 56,570 sea mines, helping to create a 300-mile barrier against Germany, stretching from Scotland to Norway. At least five U-Boats were sunk by the barrage and many others forced to waste valuable time avoiding the mines.
71 | Event: U.S. War Department authorizes Chemical Warfare Service | Date: 1918-06-28 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: The CWS coordinates all aspects of chemical warfare including administration, research, gas defense, gas offensive, development and medical training.
72 | Event: Bolsheviks murder the Czar of Russia | Date: 1918-07-17 | Tag: assassinations, wwi | Description: The former Czar Nicholas II, his wife and children, are shot by Bolsheviks at Ekaterinburg.
73 | Event: Allied Aisne-Marne Offensive | Date: 1918-07-18 | Tag: battles, operations, wwi | Description: French and American forces of the 3rd, 28th, 32nd, and 42nd Divisions go "over the top" on their offensive south of Soissons. Severe fighting along the Ourcq River establishes the reputation of the American fighting spirit. One example of this is shown by Private Sidney E. Manning, 42nd Division; severely wounded nine times on July 28, he still single-handedly breaks up a counterattack by accurate automatic rifle fire and secures his position. He will be awarded the Medal of Honor. American poet Joyce Kilmer is killed during the offensive. The French capture Courmont on July 27 and the campaign ends on Aug. 5.
74 | Event: Allied Aisne-Marne Offensive | Date: 1918-07-18 | Tag: battles, operations, wwi | Description: French and American forces of the 3rd, 28th, 32nd, and 42nd Divisions go over the top' on their offensive south of Soissons. Severe fighting along the Ourcq River establishes the reputation of the American fighting spirit. One example of this is shown by Private Sidney
76 | E. Manning, 42nd Division; severely wounded nine times on July 28, he still single-handedly breaks up a counterattack by accurate automatic rifle fire and secures his position. He will be awarded the Medal of Honor. American poet Joyce Kilmer is killed during the offensive. The French capture Courmont on July 27 and the campaign ends on Aug. 5.
77 | Event: Americans take offensive at St. Mihiel | Date: 1918-09-12 | Tag: battles, operations, wwi | Description: From flank to flank, 665,000 Allied soldiers are assembled for this offensive. The 304th Tank Brigade, commanded by Colonel George S. Patton, draws the fledgling American tank corps" first blood. By nightfall of the first day, most of the U.S. First Army stands on its second day"s objectives.
78 | Event: Americans take offensive at St. Mihiel | Date: 1918-09-12 | Tag: battles, operations, wwi | Description: From flank to flank, 665,000 Allied soldiers are assembled for this offensive. The 304th Tank Brigade, commanded by Colonel George S. Patton, draws the fledgling American tank corps' first blood. By nightfall of the first day, most of the U.S. First Army stands on its second day's objectives.
79 | Event: First phase of the U.S. Meuse-Argonne Offensive underway | Date: 1918-09-26 | Tag: battles, operations, wwi | Description: Americans begin their most important battle of the war as part of Marshal Foch"s final offensive on Western Front. On the 26th, U.S. troops, on a twenty-mile front, advance between the Argonne Forest and Verdun, taking 12 towns and 5,000 prisoners. Throughout October, the Meuse-Argonne Offensive rolls through its Third, Fourth and Fifth Phases. The A.E.F. (American Expeditionary Forces) and Germans engage in a hard-fought seesaw battle. The Americans push forward through the central Argonne and break through the Hindenburg Line capturing Cunel, Romagne, and Grandpre (cities in France). By the end of the month, the A.E.F. is poised for a final assault on Sedan, France.
80 | Event: First phase of the U.S. Meuse-Argonne Offensive underway | Date: 1918-09-26 | Tag: battles, operations, wwi | Description: Americans begin their most important battle of the war as part of Marshal Foch's final offensive on Western Front. On the 26th, U.S. troops, on a twenty-mile front, advance between the Argonne Forest and Verdun, taking 12 towns and 5,000 prisoners. Throughout October, the Meuse-Argonne Offensive rolls through its Third, Fourth and Fifth Phases.
82 | The A.E.F. (American Expeditionary Forces) and Germans engage in a hard-fought seesaw battle. The Americans push forward through the central Argonne and break through the Hindenburg Line capturing Cunel, Romagne, and Grandpre (cities in France). By the end of the month, the A.E.F. is poised for a final assault on Sedan, France.
83 | Event: Germany requests armistice; Allies refuse | Date: 1918-10-06 | Tag: conferences, wwi | Description: Through the neutral Swiss government, German Chancellor Prince Maximillian sends a note to President Wilson requesting him to restore peace through an immediate armistice with terms. The request is rejected
84 | Event: Germany requests armistice; Allies refuse | Date: 1918-10-06 | Tag: conferences, wwi | Description: Through the neutral Swiss government, German Chancellor Prince Maximillian sends a note to President Wilson requesting him to restore peace through an immediate armistice with terms. The request is rejected.
85 | Event: Hungary separates from Austria | Date: 1918-10-17 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: Austria is proclaimed a "Federation" of German-Austrians, Czechs, Ukrainians, and Yugo-Slavs. On the next day, the Czechs seize Prague, renounce Hapsburg rule and Czechoslovakia is declared independent.
86 | Event: Kaiser Wilhelm II abdicates | Date: 1918-11-09 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: German Republic proclaimed as Kaiser Wilhelm II abdicates. The next day, the ex-Kaiser and his entourage flee to Holland; they arrive at Eysden, on the frontier, at 7:30 a.m.
87 | Event: Kaiser Wilhelm II abdicates | Date: 1918-11-09 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: German Republic proclaimed as Kaiser Wilhelm Il abdicates. The next day, the ex-Kaiser and his entourage flee to Holland; they arrive at Eysden, on the frontier, at 7:30 a.m.
88 | Event: Emperor Karl of Austria abdicates | Date: 1918-11-10 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: Austria accepted truce terms, including the immediate cessation of hostilities and evacuation on the Italian Coast on November 4. Six days later in Vienna, army aeroplane hangers are burned. Shootings occur in the streets of Salzburg. Reports state that the Austrian navy is scuttled by Jugo-Slav forces to prevent the Italians from seizing the ships
89 | Event: Germany signs armistice | Date: 1918-11-11 | Tag: conferences, wwi | Description: Three days prior, German delegates were escorted through a devastated French countryside to a railway car in the Compiengne Forest, Marshal Foch"s Headquarters and were presented with terms of the Allied Armistice. Fighting ends on the Western Front Paris time 11:00 a.m. when Germany signs this armistice with the Allied Powers. The terms are harsh, intended to show German acceptance of defeat and to prevent any lengthy break for Germany to regroup and start military action again.
90 | Event: Germany signs armistice | Date: 1918-11-11 | Tag: conferences, wwi | Description: Three days prior, German delegates were escorted through a devastated French countryside to a railway car in the Compiengne Forest, Marshal Foch's Headquarters and were presented with terms of the Allied Armistice. Fighting ends on the Western Front Paris time 11:00 a.m. when Germany signs this armistice with the Allied Powers. The terms are harsh, intended to show German acceptance of defeat and to prevent any lengthy break for Germany to regroup and start military action again.
91 | Event: Lettow-Vorbeck surrenders in Rhodesia | Date: 1918-11-25 | Tag: surrenders, wwi | Description: Two weeks after the armistice, German Colonel Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck- considered one of the greatest single leaders in military history- surrenders his force of 175 European and 3,000 African soldiers. He has led a successful guerrilla campaign in East Africa for much of the war and with over 45,000 in opposition. He has never been conclusively defeated.
92 | Event: Advance Allied elements march from Luxembourg into Germany | Date: 1918-12-01 | Tag: invasions, wwi | Description: The "Watch on the Rhine" is on. U.S. soldiers occupy the middle Rhine, with the French to the South, and Belgians and British to the north. The headquarters of the 1st Division on 4 December reported that the population seemed to take the occupation in a matter of fact way, displaying no open hostility, but only mild curiosity.
93 | Event: Yugoslavia proclaimed an independent state | Date: 1918-12-01 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: The Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes is founded with a parliamentary government.  In 1929, King Alexander I changed the name of the state to Yugoslavia - land of the southern Slavs.  This state was made up of the formerly independent Kingdoms of Serbia and Montenegro; Croatia, Slavonia and Vojvodina from Hungary; Carniola, part of Styria and most of Dalmatia from Austria and the Crown province of Bosnia and Herzegovina. A provisional representation served as the parliament.
94 | Event: Yugoslavia proclaimed an independent state | Date: 1918-12-01 | Tag: developments, wwi | Description: The Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes is founded with a parliamentary government.
96 | In 1929, King Alexander I changed the name of the state to Yugoslavia - land of the southern Slavs. This state was made up of the formerly independent Kingdoms of Serbia and Montenegro; Croatia, Slavonia and Vojvodina from Hungary; Carniola, part of Styria and most of Dalmatia from Austria and the Crown province of Bosnia and Herzegovina. A provisional representation served as the parliament.
97 | Event: President Wilson arrives in Paris for peace parley | Date: 1918-12-14 | Tag: conferences, wwi | Description: Wilson receives an enthusiastic reception from the people of Paris; 10
99 | days later he leaves for London to meet with British officials.
101 | Then Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Franklin Delano Roosevelt expressed the same sentiments held by many Americans at the time of the peace parley in this 1920 recording accepting his vice-presidential nomination.
102 | Event: President Wilson arrives in Paris for peace parley | Date: 1918-12-14 | Tag: conferences, wwi | Description: Wilson receives an enthusiastic reception from the people of Paris; 10 days later he leaves for London to meet with British officials. Then Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Franklin Delano Roosevelt expressed the same sentiments held by many Americans at the time of the peace parley in this 1920 recording accepting his vice-presidential nomination
103 | Event: Peace conference convenes in Paris with preliminary meetings | Date: 1919-01-04 | Tag: conferences | Description: Diplomats in top hats and long coats converge along the Quai d'Orsay from most of the Allied nations and the city is crowded with French soldiers wanting to be demobilized.
104 | Event: Proposed Constitution for the League of Nations 1s announced | Date: 1919-02-14 | Tag: conferences, developments | Description: The Preamble states that the League will exist to promote international cooperation and to achieve international peace and security through specific rules of conduct among the world's governments.
105 | Event: Final draft of peace treaty is presented to President Wilson | Date: 1919-03-15 | Tag: conferences, developments | Description: He knows that the treaty has flaws but believes the League of Nations can address unresolved issues and help avoid the horrors of another world war.
106 | Event: Germany and Allies sign the peace treaty | Date: 1919-06-28 | Tag: conferences | Description: Representatives of Germany and the Allied and Associated Powers sign the Treaty of Versailles. The Chinese delegates refuse to sign in protest against the Shantung settlement that turns over German mines railroads and telegraph cables in China to the Japanese.
107 | Event: Germany ratifies Treaty of Versailles | Date: 1919-07-09 | Tag: developments | Description: Among many of the treaty measures, Germany cedes Alsace-Lorraine to France, recognizes Belgian sovereignty, disarms the military, and agrees to pay war reparations.
108 | Event: Treaty of Peace with Germany is submitted to the U.S. Senate | Date: 1919-07-10 | Tag: conferences | Description: President Wilson submits the Versailles Treaty to the Senate and the great debate ensues.
109 | Event: Women win the right to vote | Date: 1919-08-01 | Tag: developments | Description: Women's suffrage amendment passes U.S. Congress in June 1919 and is ratified in August, 1920, giving American women the right to vote.
110 | Event: President Wilson tours U.S. to build support for Treaty | Date: 1919-09-04 | Tag: developments | Description: The President embarks on an 8,000-mile journey, giving 40 speeches in 29 cities in 22 days.
112 | He collapses from exhaustion and is rushed back to the White House. The following month he suffers a stroke.
113 | Event: U.S. Senate refuses to ratify the Treaty of Versailles | Date: 1919-11-19 | Tag: conferences, trials | Description: Led by the "Irreconcilables," 14 Republicans and one Democrat who have always opposed the League of Nations, and Henry Cabot Lodge who draws up reservations to add to the treaty, the ratification of the Treaty of Versailles is soundly defeated.
114 | Event: Treaty of Sevres ends the war on the Eastern Front with the Ottoman Empire | Date: 1920-08-10 | Tag: conferences | Description: Again, the terms were harsh, as the Treaty divided the Middle East with a British-controlled Palestine and Iraq, French governed Syria and Lebanon, and an independent Kingdom of Hejaz (present-day Saudia Arabia).
115 | Event: Germany Invades Poland, World War II Begins | Date: 1939-09-01 | Tag: invasions, attacks, wwii | Description: Stung by German seizures in Czechoslovakia, the British and French issued security guarantees to Poland and stepped up their own rearmament. Meanwhile the Germans secretly dispatched submarines into the Atlantic, and signed a Non-Aggression Pact with the Soviet Union. Secret provisions of the pact allowed for the partition of Poland and Soviet expansion into the Baltic States. After staging a feigned Polish "attack" on a German radio station to justify their actions, the Germans invaded Poland with 53 divisions and 1,600 aircraft on 1 September. Combined arms attacks integrating tanks, artillery, infantry and air strikes proved particularly effective. Outnumbered, not yet fully mobilized, and materially outclassed, the Poles were thrown into retreat. Great Britain and France declared war on 3 September, and other Commonwealth nations soon followed. On 17 September the Soviets invaded Poland from the east, sweeping aside negligible resistance to link up with the Germans at Brest Litovsk and partition Poland as agreed. On 27 September Warsaw surrendered. By 3 October residual Polish forces surrendered and Poland was completely occupied. Great Britain and France, unprepared and still mobilizing, proved powerless to intervene.
116 | Event: Soviet Union Invades Finland, Russo-Finnish War Begins | Date: 1939-11-30 | Tag: invasions, battles, wwii | Description: Having seized much of Poland, the Soviets bullied Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania into "mutual assistance pacts" that compromised their independence. The Soviets attempted to force border concessions on Finland, but the Finns rejected them. On 30 November the Soviets attacked with 26 divisions and massive armored and air superiority. Heavily outnumbered but well trained and led, the Finns inflicted huge losses on Soviets attacks into their Mannerheim Line defenses on the Isthmus of Karelia. Elsewhere Finnish mobile columns inflicted further defeats on Soviets advancing through snowy winter forests. The Soviets rushed in more troops and equipment, and ground away with a costly battle of attrition along the Mannerheim Line and elsewhere. Ultimately Soviet numbers and their willingness to endure horrific casualties forced the Finns off of their principal defenses and to the negotiating table. On 13 March 1940 a Finnish-Soviet treaty conceded several border territories to the Soviets, while leaving the Finns independent. The valiant defense of the Finns and poor showing of the Soviets convinced Hitler and others that the Soviets were weak and poorly led, an opinion that contributed to Hitler"s subsequent decision to invade the Soviet Union.
117 | Event: Germans Overrun Denmark and Norway | Date: 1940-04-09 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: Norway was strategically positioned to provide German submarines and ships access to the Atlantic, and to secure routes whereby Swedish iron ore fed German industry. On 9 April 1940 the Germans invaded, overrunning Denmark to provide forward bases and simultaneously landing troops in Norway by sea and air. The Norwegians resisted, reinforced by the British and French. The Germans had command of the air and superior equipment and training. They exploited these advantages to force the British, French, and the Norwegian government out of the country. Fighting ceased on 9 June. The Germans established a puppet regime in Norway under Vidkun Quisling. Greenland, a strategically located Danish colony, declared itself a self-ruling territory.
118 | Event: The Battle of Flanders | Date: 1940-05-10 | Tag: battles, invasions, wwii | Description: For nine months the situation on Germany"s western frontier was quiet, prompting wags to speak of a "Phony War." On 10 May the Germans swept into neutral Holland, Belgium and Luxembourg, seizing bridgeheads and key terrain with paratroopers supported by air strikes, then quickly linking up with ground columns spearheaded by armor. The Luftwaffe supported these attacks with strikes on airfields, units and cities. British and French forces pushed forward to the relief of the Belgians and Dutch, and to a defense along the Dyle Canal. Meanwhile the German main attack burst through the Ardennes, lightly defended because the Allies considered the wooded terrain unsuitable for tanks or major formations. Many of the less capable French reserve units were deployed in this area. The German attack broke through to the English Channel in nine days, split the Allies, and trapped a major fraction of the Allied forces against the sea. The Dutch surrendered on 15 May and the Belgians on 28 May. The Allies nevertheless evacuated over 330,000 troops through Dunkirk to England.
119 | Event: The Battle of France | Date: 1940-06-05 | Tag: battles, invasions, wwii | Description: Hastily reorganizing after the Battle of Flanders and the Allied withdrawal through Dunkirk, the Germans re-oriented 142 divisions southwards against an Allied force that now numbered 64 divisions. The French attempted to defend along the Somme and Aisne Rivers, but German air attacks delayed French redeployments while the Germans raced ahead with their own. After a week of intense fighting, powerful German formations broke through west and east of Paris. During the same period, the Germans outflanked the formidable French Maginot Line defenses. French withdrawal became a rout, characterized by successive encirclements. The Allies evacuated an additional 163,000 troops from French ports still under their control. France surrendered on 22 June. The Germans occupied the north and west of the country, and established the puppet Vichy government in the south and east.
120 | Event:
122 | Italy Enters War as Germany�s Ally | Date: 1940-06-10 | Tag: invasions, attacks, wwii | Description: Having signed the "Pact of Steel" with Germany in 1939, Italy entered the war on 10 June, attacking French forces along the border between France and Italy. These attacks progressed poorly against the determined and well positioned French, but hostilities ceased with the French surrender to the Germans on 22 June. The Italian economy and people had not yet been mobilized for war, but the powerful Italian fleet did threaten Allied dispositions in the Mediterranean.
123 | Event: The Battle of Britain | Date: 1940-07-02 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: Inspired by her new Prime Minister, Winston S. Churchill, Great Britain fought on after the fall of France. Hitler made plans for an invasion, code named Operation Sea-lion. An essential first step was the destruction of Britain"s Royal Air Force and seizure of air supremacy. Waves of German aircraft swept in to bomb airfields and destroy planes. Heavily outnumbered, the British relied upon interception and decryption of German messages, telephone linked networks of aircraft spotters, newly invented and installed radar stations, the tracking of German navigational beams, and operational depth to gain intelligence advantages and give battle on favorable terms. British Spitfire and Hurricane fighters proved more maneuverable than their German counterparts. Allied pilots who survived being shot down could be rescued on the ground, whereas surviving Germans would be captured. Commonwealth, European exile, and other international volunteer pilots reinforced the beleaguered British airmen. German aircraft and pilot losses mounted catastrophically. Hitler set aside his invasion plans on 17 September.
124 | Event: The �Blitz� | Date: 1940-09-07 | Tag: attacks, operations, wwii | Description: Having failed to destroy the Royal Air Force and infuriated by British air raids on Berlin, Hitler shifted emphasis to area bombing attacks " primarily at night - on British ports and industrial cities. He hoped that terror, public demoralization and economic damage would force concessions. The British had prepared networks of air raid shelters, early warning systems, evacuation plans, anti-aircraft batteries and civil defense organizations. The Underground (subway systems), especially in London, proved particularly useful as shelters. British leadership, inspired by the Royal Family and the Prime Minister, set a determined example. Despite enduring over 45,000 tons of bombs, 180,000 casualties and 23,000 fatalities between July and December, British morale held. The last major attack of the "Blitz" occurred against London over the night of 10-11 May, 1941.
125 | Event: The �Blitz� | Date: 1940-09-07 | Tag: attacks, operations, wwii | Description: Having failed to destroy the Royal Air Force and infuriated by British air raids on Berlin, Hitler shifted emphasis to area bombing attacks " primarily at night - on British ports and industrial cities. He hoped that terror, public demoralization and economic damage would force concessions. The British had prepared networks of air raid shelters, early warning systems, evacuation plans, anti-aircraft batteries and civil defense organizations. The Underground (subway systems), especially in London, proved particularly useful as shelters. British leadership, inspired by the Royal Family and the Prime Minister, set a determined example. Despite enduring over 45,000 tons of bombs, 180,000 casualties and 23,000 fatalities between July and December, British morale held. The last major attack of the "Blitz" occurred against London over the night of 10-11 May, 1941.
126 | Event: Italy attacks Egypt, North African Campaign Begins | Date: 1940-09-13 | Tag: attacks, invasions, wwii | Description: In pursuit of a Mediterranean empire, Mussolini ordered Marshal Rodolfo Graziani, in command of over 200,000 Italian troops in Libya, to attack British defended Egypt. The British, although heavily outnumbered, were better led and more mechanized. Graziani halted at Sidi Barrani to build up his logistics, deploying his forces in a string of isolated encampments. British mobile columns struck suddenly, broke through gaps between the encampments, defeated the forward deployed Italians in detail, captured many, and pursued relentlessly. By 16 December the British had driven the Italians from Egypt. By 7 February Italian remnants east of Tripoli were surrounded and surrendered near Beda Fomm, after having lost Bardia and Tobruk. The Italian X Corps still held Tripoli, with reinforcements en route. These proved to be the opening battles of a campaign that extended into May 1943. The stakes were control of Mediterranean shipping lanes, the Suez Canal, and access to Mid-East oil.
127 | Event: Tripartite Pact of Germany, Italy and Japan | Date: 1940-09-27 | Tag: conferences, developments, wwii | Description: The expansionist dictatorships of Germany, Italy and Japan signed a pact committing each to declare war on any country that joined the war against any of the other three. This was most obviously directed against the United States to preclude interference with conquests that had already occurred or were occurring. The pact envisioned the re-division of the Eastern Hemisphere in the favor of the signing powers. The three signatories came to be known as the Berlin-Rome-Tokyo Axis, or the Axis.
128 | Event: Italy attacks Greece, Balkan Campaigns Begin | Date: 1940-10-28 | Tag: attacks, invasions, wwii | Description: Anticipating an easy victory, the Italians attacked into Greece from Albania with seven divisions. Not yet mobilized, outnumbered initially, and poorly equipped, the Greeks fought back valiantly, taking advantage of rough terrain and their mountain fighting skills. Attacking the exposed flanks of columns moving through difficult terrain, the Greeks inflicted heavy losses and forced an Italian withdrawal. Meanwhile the British reinforced the Greeks, first with air contingents and eventually with 62,000 ground troops. The British also badly defeated the Italian fleet in an air raid on Taranto (11-12 November) and in a naval battle off Cape Matapan (26-29 March). By mid-March the Greeks had seized the initiative, overrun a third of Albania, and turned back a second Italian offensive. Hitler grew concerned with the deteriorating situation, and worried that British bombers could reach vital Rumanian oil fields from Greek bases.
129 | Event: President Franklin D. Roosevelt Proposes Lend-Lease | Date: 1940-12-17 | Tag: developments, wwii | Description: Alarmed by Axis advances in Europe and Asia, President Franklin D. Roosevelt positioned the United States to support the Allies. He overcame isolationalist sentiment and a series of Neutrality Acts from the 1930s as he did so. In November 1939 he secured "cash and carry" provisions allowing belligerents to buy munitions in the United States, provided they transported them themselves. Only the Allies, then supreme at sea, benefitted. In September 1940 the United States passed its first peacetime Selective Service Act. It also gave Britain and Canada fifty destroyers and ten Coast Guard cutters in return for leases on selected bases in the Western Hemisphere. In December President Roosevelt proposed a Lend-Lease Bill, whereby equipment could theoretically be returned and accounts settled later " on permissive terms. He used the metaphor of loaning a neighbor whose house was on fire a garden hose, but not charging him for it. Lend-Lease became law on 11 March 1941. It ultimately accounted for $51 Billion ($759 Billion at 2008 prices) in aid to the Allies before terminating on 2 September 1945.
130 | Event: British Secure East Africa, Drive Italians Out | Date: 1941-01-19 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: Mussolini aspired to enlarge his East African Empire. After declaring war in June 1940, he overran British Somaliland and seized border outposts in the Sudan and Kenya. His forces numbered 256,000, of which seventy percent were locally recruited African askaris. British forces in theater initially numbered 30,000, but with command of the sea they reinforced these with 220,000 Commonwealth troops from India, South Africa, British West Africa, Northern and Southern Rhodesia and Great Britain, and built up their own colonial contingents in Kenya and the Sudan. Haile Selassie of Ethiopia actively cooperated with the British, raising patriotic partisans to assist Commonwealth forces. Beginning on 19 January converging columns from the Sudan and Kenya, supported by amphibious landings, rolled back the Italians. Fierce fighting near Keren proved decisive, and the Allies liberated Addis Ababa on 6 April. The capture of Gondar on 28 November, after a seven month siege, ended the campaign.
131 | Event: German Afrika Corps Intervenes in Libya | Date: 1941-03-24 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: Alarmed by Mussolini"s defeats in North Africa and East Africa, Hitler resolved to stabilize the situation with German reinforcements. General Erwin J. E. Rommel and the Deutches Afrika-Korps deployed through Tripoli, and attacked beginning on 24 March. Rommel found the British weakened and poorly deployed due to reinforcements dispatched to Greece. He quickly drove them from all of Libya except the port of Tobruk. Rommel skillfully turned back several British counterattacks, but failed in repeated efforts to seize Tobruk. The British finally built up sufficient forces to drive Rommel back to El Agheila. Rommel recovered quickly because of shortened supply lines, and returned to the attack. From February through June 1942 the situation was a stalemate on a line running from Gazala to Bir Hacheim, about thirty miles west of Tobruk. Both sides struggled to rebuild their strength during this period.
132 | Event: Germans Overrun Yugoslavia and Greece | Date: 1941-04-06 | Tag: invasions, attacks, wwii | Description: Concerned with Italian defeats and the British presence in Greece, and determined to secure his Balkan flank for operations against Russia, Hitler wooed Yugoslavia and prepared to crush Greece. After a coup, Yugoslavia rejected his overtures. On 6 April the Germans paralyzed Belgrade and Yugoslav communications with devastating air attacks, and launched ground columns into Yugoslavia from Italy (the Italian Second Army), Austria, Hungary (the Hungarian Third Army), Rumania and Bulgaria. The Yugoslavs were ill equipped, poorly deployed, not yet mobilized, and torn by Serbian-Croat rivalry " with many Croats supporting the Germans. The Yugoslavs collapsed quickly. The Greeks and their British allies were prepared to defend against attacks from Albania and Bulgaria, but out of position for attacks through Yugoslavia. The Germans raced through Yugoslavia and turned Greek defenses on both sides of the Monastir Gap. The British delayed south and evacuated by sea. Greek resistance collapsed by 30 April.
133 | Event: Rashid Ali Rebellion in Iraq | Date: 1941-05-02 | Tag: invasions, battles, wwii | Description: The British governed Iraq as a mandate after World War I, and granted it independence as a constitutional monarchy in 1932. Conditions of an associated Anglo-Iraqi Treaty included British military bases and freedom of troop movements from them, largely to secure oil supplies. Many Iraqis resented these terms. On 1 April fervent nationalist and anti-British Rashid Ali seized power in a coup. Collaborating with Italians and Germans through Vichy French Syria, Rashid mobilized forces and moved to threaten British bases. On 2 May fighting broke out at Habbaniyah, west of Baghdad, when the British moved to pre-empt a siege of their airfield there. Heavily outnumbered British and locally recruited Assyrian and Kurdish levies defended Habbaniyah Airfield for four days, assisted by air strikes on the besieging Iraqis. Hastily deployed Commonwealth columns of British, Indian and Arab Legion troops marched to their relief, and carried the fight to the insurgents, seizing Fallujah and securing al-Basrah. Reinforcements landed through al-Basrah. Fighting included imaginative uses of limited air power by the British, Germans and Italians alike. Commonwealth forces crushed the rebellion and re-established the constitutional monarchy, signing an armistice on 31 May.
134 | Event: Battleship Bismarck Foray | Date: 1941-05-18 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: The Battle of the Atlantic had raged in earnest for over a year, with German U-Boats preying on Allied convoys while Allied escort ships fought to bring convoys safely to port. Losses were heavy. The Allies lost 317,000 tons of shipping in February, 363,000 in March and 282,000 in April. The Germans, on the other hand, lost increasing numbers of submarines as British tactics and weapons improved. The Germans believed that combining capable surface raiders with submarines might tip the balance in their favor. A February foray by the battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau sank 22 ships. On 18 May the battleship Bismarck, escorted by the heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen, sortied into the North Atlantic. In an engagement in the Denmark Straits the two ships sank the British battle cruiser HMS Hood and drove off other warships, shocking the Royal Navy. A relentless hunt by air and sea ensued. Damaged, the Bismarck rounded the British Isles making for St. Nazaire in France and protective air cover. After an epic chase the British caught up with and overwhelmed the Bismarck in a final battle on 27 May. Allied shipping losses dropped off thereafter, in part because of the diversion of German airpower to Russia.
135 | Event: Battle for Crete | Date: 1941-05-20 | Tag: battles, invasions, wwii | Description: Having driven the British from mainland Greece, the Germans resolved to break British control of the Eastern Mediterranean by seizing Crete. From Crete German aircraft could range to the coast of North Africa, contesting vital Commonwealth shipping lanes. The Greco-British forces defending Crete, numbering about 42,000, consisted largely of depleted units withdrawn from Greece. They were short of supplies and equipment, especially ground transportation, and dug in to defend selected airfields and facilities. On 20 May the German Luftwaffe (Air Force) assaulted with a parachute division after intensive air strikes. They soon reinforced the paratroopers with an air-landed mountain division, and Italian troops landed amphibiously. Fighting was fierce and casualties on both sides heavy, particularly around Maleme Airfield. The British Navy intercepted and destroyed reinforcements coming by sea, while suffering heavily from air attacks. The Germans poured in reinforcements by air, and the British evacuated by sea. The fighting ended on 1 June with the surrender of remnant Allied defenders.
136 | Event: Allies Drive Vichy French from Syria | Date: 1941-06-08 | Tag: invasions, battles, wwii | Description: Concerned by Vichy complicity in the Rashid Ali Rebellion in Iraq, the British resolved to drive them from bases in Syria and Lebanon. Four converging columns of British, Australian, Indian, Free French, Arab Legion and Jewish commando forces drove into Syria from Palestine and Iraq. Fighting was fierce in front of several of these columns, inflicting 6,300 casualties on the 45,000 Vichy defenders and 4,100 on the 34,000 attackers. Damascus fell on 21 June. The Vichy commander in Syria signed an armistice on 11 July. Free French General Georges Catroux assumed control of Lebanon and Syria.
137 | Event:
139 | Germans Invade Soviet Union, Russian Campaign Begins | Date: 1941-06-22 | Tag: invasions, attacks, wwii | Description: Hitler had long intended to attack the Soviet Union. His book Mein Kampf (My Struggle), written during the 1920"s, was fervently anti-communist and committed to the forcible acquisition of Lebensraum ("living room") for the German people in the east. The Nazi-Soviet Pact of 1939 had been a measure of convenience. In the middle of 1940 Hitler directed his generals to plan and prepare for an invasion. On 22 June 1941 the Germans attacked with a massive force, the equivalent of over 160 divisions. They were soon aided by Finnish, Hungarian, Italian, Rumanian and Slovakian forces. The Soviets initially defended with an equivalent of over 160 divisions, but were poorly positioned and caught by surprise. German air strikes destroyed over 1200 Soviet aircraft on the first day, and ground forces spearheaded by armor sped forward in a series of penetrations and encirclements. The Germans committed an army group each to advances towards Leningrad, Moscow and through the Ukraine. By December these army groups were besieging Leningrad, on the outskirts of Moscow, and beyond Kharkov.
140 | Event: United States Garrisons Iceland, Extends Convoy Protection | Date: 1941-07-07 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: The United States Navy became increasingly involved in protecting Atlantic shipping from German U-Boat attacks. In April it opened naval and air bases in Bermuda as part of a Central Atlantic Neutrality Patrol. In May convoys across the Atlantic began to be continuously escorted from Canada. On 1 July United States aircraft began antisubmarine patrols from Newfoundland. On 7 July American forces landed in Iceland and took over the responsibility for garrisoning it from the British, who had originally occupied the island on 10 May 1940. The United States Atlantic Fleet committed to protect ships of any nationality sailing between Iceland and North America.
141 | Event: Atlantic Charter | Date: 1941-08-14 | Tag: conferences, developments, wwii | Description: British Prime Minister Winston S. Churchill and United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt issued a joint declaration that came to be called the Atlantic Charter. They developed this during meetings from 9-14 August 1941 on board warships in Placentia Bay, Newfoundland. The Atlantic Charter summarized the objectives of the two nations, and of many like-minded partners who later adopted its principles, and became the blueprint for the post-war world they sought. Key points included self-determination for all peoples, freedom from fear and want, no territorial aggrandizement by the victor nations, territorial adjustments only in accordance with the wishes of the people concerned, international economic cooperation, lower trade barriers, freedom of the seas, international advancement of social welfare, and disarmament. Popular ideals to begin with, the provisions of the Atlantic Charter were further popularized on posters and in media campaigns to inspire a common vision of the war"s ultimate purpose.
142 | Event: Anglo-Soviet Intervention in Iran | Date: 1941-08-25 | Tag: invasions, wwii | Description: The British and the Soviet Union were now allies in the war against Hitler, but German advances threatened to isolate them from each other. The embattled Soviets were in desperate need of supplies, yet only the arduous and strategically exposed Arctic sea route through Archangel and other ports was immediately available to them. Rail connections across Iran from the Persian Gulf through Baku seemed promising, but the government of Reza Shah Pahlavi denied their use to the Allies and refused to expel the Germans from the country. The British were also concerned that Iranian oil might fall under German control. On 25 August British and Indian troops invaded Iran through Basra and Kanaqin in Iraq, while the Soviets advanced from the Caucasus. The columns quickly overwhelmed Iranian opposition, linked up, secured the Trans-Iranian Railway, and occupied the principal oil fields. Reza Shah Pahlavi went into exile, and his son signed a treaty pledging cooperation during the war on the condition of the restoration of independence afterwards. The Persian Corridor became a conduit for over eight million tons of supplies, much of it American Lend-Lease. In due course American soldiers, particularly those of the Quartermaster Corps, would become heavily involved.
143 | Event: Jews in Occupied Europe Ordered to Wear Star of David Badges | Date: 1941-09-06 | Tag: developments, attacks, wwii | Description: Hitler had long espoused hatred of Jews, and promulgated theories blaming an international Jewish conspiracy for Germany"s defeat in World War I and other problems. His regime persecuted German Jews from the beginning, subjecting them to property confiscation, imprisonment, and physical attack. As his international aggression advanced, he exported this maltreatment to newly conquered territories. The Nazis walled Polish Jews into urban ghettos, and sustained campaigns of extortion, deportation and murder. Extermination squads followed the Nazi advance into the Soviet Union to rid the country of Jews, communists, and other "undesirable elements." On 6 September the Nazis directed that all Jews in occupied Europe wear distinctive Star of David badges to facilitate immediate identification. This advanced Hitler"s agenda for dealing with the "Jewish problem" in a total manner.
144 | Event: Soviet Winter Offensive to Secure Moscow | Date: 1941-12-06 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: The Germans inflicted massive defeats upon the Soviets in their advances after 22 June, surrounding, killing and capturing hundreds of thousands at a time. The Soviets fought on, retiring ever deeper into their vast territory. The Germans became worn down, particularly from shuttling units great distances in pursuit of diverse objectives. By November their infantry divisions were reduced to sixty-five percent effectiveness, their panzer divisions to fifty percent effectiveness, and their tank strength to one third of normal. Temperatures fell to forty degrees below zero Fahrenheit, and neither their equipment nor their soldiers were prepared for such extremes. The Soviets benefited from shortening supply lines, the arrival of lend-lease and other aid from the west, and their own preparedness for the harsh winter. Reinforcements from Siberia poured into the Moscow area, as did substantial numbers of newly built and highly effective T-34 tanks. On 6 December the Soviets counterattacked in overwhelming force, often bypassing increasingly road-bound Germans in the snowy terrain. They threw the Germans back a hundred miles from the outskirts of Moscow before their offensive ground to a halt.
145 | Event: United States Antisubmarine Campaign | Date: 1941-12-07 | Tag: operations, battles, wwii | Description: The United States became increasingly involved in securing maritime routes across the Atlantic Ocean from May 1940 onwards. After the attack on Pearl Harbor, it became an Allied power and a full belligerent. At first shipping losses surged as the Germans expanded their U-Boat campaign into vulnerable American waters against under-prepared and under-protected routes. Japanese advances threatened communications to Australia and New Zealand and virtually cut off China, but the Japanese never prioritized their submarine fleet as did the Germans. The success of the Allied war effort depended on moving troops and supplies across vast oceans. Naval operations prioritized escort, armed guard and antisubmarine operations. New technologies like radar, sonar and improved depth charges entered service, and merchant ships increasingly travelled in convoys protected by combatant convoy escorts. Antisubmarine planes ranged from Caribbean islands, the east coast of North America, Greenland, Iceland and the British Isles in the Atlantic, and from a broad sweep of islands seized in the Pacific. Code-breaking and the capture of encryption machines provided critical information advantages. Through 1942 the balance poised precariously, with the Allies losing 800,000 tons of shipping more than they replaced with new construction. In May 1943 the balance finally tipped decisively in favor of the Allies. In that month increasingly effective Allied forces sank 41 of 240 German U-Boats, while losing fewer than 300,000 tons of shipping to them. Growing air superiority allowed the Allies to take the fight ever closer to German submarine bases, especially those along the Bay of Biscay. Supplies and reinforcements crossed the Atlantic in ever increasing volume, while the German U-Boats dwindled in effectiveness. In the Pacific, American naval victories and islands seized from the enemy compressed the scope of dwindling Japanese submarine forces.
146 | Event: Central Pacific Campaign | Date: 1941-12-07 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: After their attack on Pearl Harbor, Japanese offensives ranged widely through the Pacific and Indian Oceans. Of American Pacific holdings, Johnston Island and Midway Island were shelled, Guam fell on 10 December, Wake fell after a spirited fight on 23 December, and the Philippine Islands Campaign extended from 7 December 1941 to 10 May 1942. The United States Navy struck back with raids on the Marshalls, Gilberts, Bougainville, Wake, Marcus Island and Salamaua-Lae during February and March 1942. In April a daring raid led by Lieutenant Colonel James Doolittle carried American bombers launched from an aircraft carrier through Tokyo and other Japanese cities. The Japanese determined that they had to destroy the American fleet in the Central Pacific to secure their holdings. They landed in the Aleutian Islands Campaign (3 June 1942 " 24 August 1943) to divert American attention, and then initiated an assault on Midway Island to draw in the American fleet. The Americans had broken Japanese naval codes sufficiently to develop invaluable intelligence. Avoiding a surface battle on Japanese terms, on 4 June 1942 they attacked the Japanese carriers by air when the planes from them were replenishing themselves upon having returned from bombing Midway. The Americans sank four aircraft carriers while losing one. This victory was decisive, crippled the Japanese fleet, and put it on the defensive. Through the rest of 1942 and most of 1943 both sides built up their capabilities and the Central Pacific was relatively quiet, except for American naval raids on Makin, Buin-Faisi-Tonolai, Marcus Island, Tarawa and Wake. Beginning 20 November 1943 the 27th Infantry Division (United States Army) seized Makin Island, and the United States 2nd Marine Division captured Tarawa after savage fighting. These twin assaults in the Gilbert Islands secured valuable airfields, provided invaluable experience with respect to amphibious warfare, and initiated a sustained and strategically consequential drive across the Pacific. This brought American forces ever closer to the Japanese home islands.
147 | Event: Central Pacific Campaign | Date: 1941-12-07 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: After their attack on Pearl Harbor, Japanese offensives ranged widely through the Pacific and Indian Oceans. Of American Pacific holdings, Johnston Island and Midway Island were shelled, Guam fell on 10 December, Wake fell after a spirited fight on 23 December, and the Philippine Islands Campaign extended from 7 December 1941 to 10 May 1942. The United States Navy struck back with raids on the Marshalls, Gilberts, Bougainville, Wake, Marcus Island and Salamaua-Lae during February and March 1942. In April a daring raid led by Lieutenant Colonel James Doolittle carried American bombers launched from an aircraft carrier through Tokyo and other Japanese cities. The Japanese determined that they had to destroy the American fleet in the Central Pacific to secure their holdings. They landed in the Aleutian Islands Campaign (3 June 1942 " 24 August 1943) to divert American attention, and then initiated an assault on Midway Island to draw in the American fleet. The Americans had broken Japanese naval codes sufficiently to develop invaluable intelligence. Avoiding a surface battle on Japanese terms, on 4 June 1942 they attacked the Japanese carriers by air when the planes from them were replenishing themselves upon having returned from bombing Midway. The Americans sank four aircraft carriers while losing one. This victory was decisive, crippled the Japanese fleet, and put it on the defensive. Through the rest of 1942 and most of 1943 both sides built up their capabilities and the Central Pacific was relatively quiet, except for American naval raids on Makin, Buin-Faisi-Tonolai, Marcus Island, Tarawa and Wake. Beginning 20 November 1943 the 27th Infantry Division (United States Army) seized Makin Island, and the United States 2nd Marine Division captured Tarawa after savage fighting. These twin assaults in the Gilbert Islands secured valuable airfields, provided invaluable experience with respect to amphibious warfare, and initiated a sustained and strategically consequential drive across the Pacific. This brought American forces ever closer to the Japanese home islands.
148 | Event: United States Antisubmarine Campaign | Date: 1941-12-07 | Tag: operations, attacks, wwii | Description: The United States became increasingly involved in securing maritime routes across the Atlantic Ocean from May 1940 onwards. After the attack on Pearl Harbor, it became an Allied power and a full belligerent. At first shipping losses surged as the Germans expanded their U-Boat campaign into vulnerable American waters against under-prepared and under-protected routes. Japanese advances threatened communications to Australia and New Zealand and virtually cut off China, but the Japanese never prioritized their submarine fleet as did the Germans. The success of the Allied war effort depended on moving troops and supplies across vast oceans. Naval operations prioritized escort, armed guard and antisubmarine operations. New technologies like radar, sonar and improved depth charges entered service, and merchant ships increasingly travelled in convoys protected by combatant convoy escorts. Antisubmarine planes ranged from Caribbean islands, the east coast of North America, Greenland, Iceland and the British Isles in the Atlantic, and from a broad sweep of islands seized in the Pacific. Code-breaking and the capture of encryption machines provided critical information advantages. Through 1942 the balance poised precariously, with the Allies losing 800,000 tons of shipping more than they replaced with new construction. In May 1943 the balance finally tipped decisively in favor of the Allies. In that month increasingly effective Allied forces sank 41 of 240 German U-Boats, while losing fewer than 300,000 tons of shipping to them. Growing air superiority allowed the Allies to take the fight ever closer to German submarine bases, especially those along the Bay of Biscay. Supplies and reinforcements crossed the Atlantic in ever increasing volume, while the German U-Boats dwindled in effectiveness. In the Pacific, American naval victories and islands seized from the enemy compressed the scope of dwindling Japanese submarine forces.
149 | Event: Philippine Islands Campaign | Date: 1941-12-07 | Tag: invasions, battles, wwii | Description: The United States had committed to Philippine independence by 1946, and was in the process of training a Philippine Commonwealth Army when the Japanese attacked. Approximately 31,000 American ground forces, to include 12,000 Philippine Scouts serving in the U. S. Army, were in the islands on 7 December 1941. All but a few of the newly raised Filipino units were poorly equipped and unevenly trained. The Japanese enjoyed naval and air superiority from the outset, and quickly seized airfields ashore after preliminary landings beginning on 10 December. On 22 December they launched their main attack through the Lingayen Gulf, and on the next day launched a smaller invasion force through Lamon Bay. The embattled Filipino-American Army was forced off a series of delaying positions, and withdrew into the difficult terrain of the Bataan Peninsula. Here it put up a valiant defense, forcing the Japanese to call off their offensive on 8 February for several weeks while they awaited additional troops and supplies. Meanwhile disease and malnutrition ate away at the beleaguered defenders, isolated from re-supplies of food, medicine and ammunition. Heavily reinforced, the Japanese overwhelmed Bataan with a renewed week-long offensive that began on 3 April. The nearby island fortress of Corregidor held out against savage bombardments until 6 May. Elsewhere in the Philippine Islands the Japanese seized key facilities. Filipino troops by and large melted away into the mountains. Some returned to their homes, others began to operate as guerillas.
150 | Event: Burma Campaign | Date: 1941-12-07 | Tag: invasions, battles, wwii | Description: The Japanese prized Burma, a country surrounded by mountains and rich in rice, timber and oil, as a bastion on the flank of their expanding empire. Seizing Burma would cut off supplies shipped through Rangoon into China over the so called Burma Road. Operating out of recently occupied Thailand, the Japanese Fifteenth Army quickly overran the Tenasserim area of Burma and seized its strategically located airfields. Commonwealth forces, a mix of British, Indian and Burmese troops, evacuated Rangoon on 7 March 1942 after delaying through the jungle and at the Salween and Sittang Rivers. Chiang Kai-Shek of China sent the Chinese Fifth and Sixth Armies into Burma to assist the British. These were commanded by Lieutenant General Joseph Stillwell, Chiang Kai-Shek"s American chief of staff, and included a number of Americans in various positions. The 1st American Volunteer Group of the Chinese Air Force, nicknamed the Flying Tigers, assisted with air support. The Japanese had air and naval supremacy, were reinforced by sea, and pressed the attack. After further fighting, the British and Chinese Fifth Army, accompanied by Stillwell, withdrew over the mountains into India in May. The remaining Chinese and the Flying Tigers withdrew into mountainous southern China.
151 | Event: Burma Campaign | Date: 1941-12-07 | Tag: invasions, battles, wwii | Description: The Japanese prized Burma, a country surrounded by mountains and rich in rice, timber and oil, as a bastion on the flank of their expanding empire. Seizing Burma would cut off supplies shipped through Rangoon into China over the so called Burma Road. Operating out of recently occupied Thailand, the Japanese Fifteenth Army quickly overran the Tenasserim area of Burma and seized its strategically located airfields. Commonwealth forces, a mix of British, Indian and Burmese troops, evacuated Rangoon on 7 March 1942 after delaying through the jungle and at the Salween and Sittang Rivers. Chiang Kai-Shek of China sent the Chinese Fifth and Sixth Armies into Burma to assist the British. These were commanded by Lieutenant General Joseph Stillwell, Chiang Kai-Shek"s American chief of staff, and included a number of Americans in various positions. The 1st American Volunteer Group of the Chinese Air Force, nicknamed the Flying Tigers, assisted with air support. The Japanese had air and naval supremacy, were reinforced by sea, and pressed the attack. After further fighting, the British and Chinese Fifth Army, accompanied by Stillwell, withdrew over the mountains into India in May. The remaining Chinese and the Flying Tigers withdrew into mountainous southern China.
152 | Event: Central Pacific Campaign | Date: 1941-12-07 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: After their attack on Pearl Harbor, Japanese offensives ranged widely through the Pacific and Indian Oceans. Of American Pacific holdings, Johnston Island and Midway Island were shelled, Guam fell on 10 December, Wake fell after a spirited fight on 23 December, and the Philippine Islands Campaign extended from 7 December 1941 to 10 May 1942. The United States Navy struck back with raids on the Marshalls, Gilberts, Bougainville, Wake, Marcus Island and Salamaua-Lae during February and March 1942. In April a daring raid led by Lieutenant Colonel James Doolittle carried American bombers launched from an aircraft carrier through Tokyo and other Japanese cities. The Japanese determined that they had to destroy the American fleet in the Central Pacific to secure their holdings. They landed in the Aleutian Islands Campaign (3 June 1942 " 24 August 1943) to divert American attention, and then initiated an assault on Midway Island to draw in the American fleet. The Americans had broken Japanese naval codes sufficiently to develop invaluable intelligence. Avoiding a surface battle on Japanese terms, on 4 June 1942 they attacked the Japanese carriers by air when the planes from them were replenishing themselves upon having returned from bombing Midway. The Americans sank four aircraft carriers while losing one. This victory was decisive, crippled the Japanese fleet, and put it on the defensive. Through the rest of 1942 and most of 1943 both sides built up their capabilities and the Central Pacific was relatively quiet, except for American naval raids on Makin, Buin-Faisi-Tonolai, Marcus Island, Tarawa and Wake. Beginning 20 November 1943 the 27th Infantry Division (United States Army) seized Makin Island, and the United States 2nd Marine Division captured Tarawa after savage fighting. These twin assaults in the Gilbert Islands secured valuable airfields, provided invaluable experience with respect to amphibious warfare, and initiated a sustained and strategically consequential drive across the Pacific. This brought American forces ever closer to the Japanese home islands.
153 | Event: Japanese Attack Pearl Harbor, United States Enters War | Date: 1941-12-07 | Tag: attacks, invasions, wwii | Description: The United States championed increasingly severe economic sanctions to reverse Japanese aggression. In July 1941 the United States and the Allies responded to the Japanese occupation of French Indo-China by freezing assets and cancelling oil deals, effectively cutting off seventy-five percent of Japan"s trade and ninety percent of its oil. Rather than withdrawing, the Japanese decided upon war. Their grand strategic objectives were to seize oil-rich Indonesia, cut off aid to the embattled Chinese through Burma, and construct a network of defenses across the Pacific too formidable for the Americans to fight their way through. Success required destroying the American fleet at Pearl Harbor and over-running American bases in the Philippines. Deploying by a circuitous and little traveled northern route, a Japanese task force built around six carriers carrying over four hundred planes arrived off Oahu undetected. At 0755 local time on 7 December, a Sunday, the first of two waves of Japanese planes attacked. Effects were devastating. Eighteen ships, including seven of eight battleships, were sunk or severely damaged. Of American aircraft 347 of 402 were destroyed or damaged, most on the ground. American military casualties totaled 3,471. Fortuitously for the Americans, their own aircraft carriers were at sea and not present for the surprise attack, and the Japanese did relatively little damage to the oil-storage and harbor facilities. The United States declared war on Japan on 8 December. Germany and Italy, in accordance with the Tripartite Pact, declared war on the United States on 11 December.
154 | Event: United States Antisubmarine Campaign | Date: 1941-12-07 | Tag: operations, battles, wwii | Description: The United States became increasingly involved in securing maritime routes across the Atlantic Ocean from May 1940 onwards. After the attack on Pearl Harbor, it became an Allied power and a full belligerent. At first shipping losses surged as the Germans expanded their U-Boat campaign into vulnerable American waters against under-prepared and under-protected routes. Japanese advances threatened communications to Australia and New Zealand and virtually cut off China, but the Japanese never prioritized their submarine fleet as did the Germans. The success of the Allied war effort depended on moving troops and supplies across vast oceans. Naval operations prioritized escort, armed guard and antisubmarine operations. New technologies like radar, sonar and improved depth charges entered service, and merchant ships increasingly travelled in convoys protected by combatant convoy escorts. Antisubmarine planes ranged from Caribbean islands, the east coast of North America, Greenland, Iceland and the British Isles in the Atlantic, and from a broad sweep of islands seized in the Pacific. Code-breaking and the capture of encryption machines provided critical information advantages. Through 1942 the balance poised precariously, with the Allies losing 800,000 tons of shipping more than they replaced with new construction. In May 1943 the balance finally tipped decisively in favor of the Allies. In that month increasingly effective Allied forces sank 41 of 240 German U-Boats, while losing fewer than 300,000 tons of shipping to them. Growing air superiority allowed the Allies to take the fight ever closer to German submarine bases, especially those along the Bay of Biscay. Supplies and reinforcements crossed the Atlantic in ever increasing volume, while the German U-Boats dwindled in effectiveness. In the Pacific, American naval victories and islands seized from the enemy compressed the scope of dwindling Japanese submarine forces.
155 | Event:
157 | Philippine Islands Campaign | Date: 1941-12-07 | Tag: invasions, battles, wwii | Description: The United States had committed to Philippine independence by 1946, and was in the process of training a Philippine Commonwealth Army when the Japanese attacked. Approximately 31,000 American ground forces, to include 12,000 Philippine Scouts serving in the U. S. Army, were in the islands on 7 December 1941. All but a few of the newly raised Filipino units were poorly equipped and unevenly trained. The Japanese enjoyed naval and air superiority from the outset, and quickly seized airfields ashore after preliminary landings beginning on 10 December. On 22 December they launched their main attack through the Lingayen Gulf, and on the next day launched a smaller invasion force through Lamon Bay. The embattled Filipino-American Army was forced off a series of delaying positions, and withdrew into the difficult terrain of the Bataan Peninsula. Here it put up a valiant defense, forcing the Japanese to call off their offensive on 8 February for several weeks while they awaited additional troops and supplies. Meanwhile disease and malnutrition ate away at the beleaguered defenders, isolated from re-supplies of food, medicine and ammunition. Heavily reinforced, the Japanese overwhelmed Bataan with a renewed week-long offensive that began on 3 April. The nearby island fortress of Corregidor held out against savage bombardments until 6 May. Elsewhere in the Philippine Islands the Japanese seized key facilities. Filipino troops by and large melted away into the mountains. Some returned to their homes, others began to operate as guerillas.
158 | Event: East Indies Campaign | Date: 1942-01-01 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: The Japanese moved quickly to seize the oil-rich Netherlands East Indies (Indonesia). The Allies hastily improvised a combined American-British-Dutch-Australian Command (ABDACOM). ABDACOM deployed far fewer ships and planes than the Japanese, and its small garrisons were scattered from the Malay Peninsula through the East Indies to Australia. The Japanese leapfrogged along multiple axes, first striking air fields to achieve air supremacy, and then landing troops to seize ports and airfields " repeating the process as they advanced. American ships fought Japanese ships and planes at the Makassar Strait, Badung Strait, Sunda Strait and in the Java Sea. On 25 February ABDACOM collapsed, and British and American forces withdrew. The Japanese overran Sumatra, Borneo and Java, and pushed on towards Timor, a base that would put their planes in range of northern Australia. They landed troops at Lae and Salamaua in Eastern New Guinea to facilitate operations against critical Allied facilities at Port Moresby. An amphibious effort to land troops near Port Moresby turned back in the face of repeated attacks by American carrier task forces, culminating in the four day Battle of the Coral Sea (4-8 May). This battle is notable as the first major naval engagement fought via air strikes without the opposing ships making contact. The Coral Sea was a tactical draw, but had the strategic effect of causing the Japanese to shift from an amphibious to an overland approach on Port Moresby, beginning on 22 July.
159 | Event: Wannsee Conference Formalizes Holocaust | Date: 1942-01-20 | Tag: conferences, developments, wwii | Description: Nazi and Axis oppression of European Jews became more savage and comprehensive as their armies advanced. They dispatched many Jews to concentration camps to serve as slave laborers under horrific conditions. In a conference convened in Wannsee, a suburb of Berlin, Nazi senior leaders committed to more thorough plans for systematic extermination. European Jews were to be transported to the East. Those who could work would be worked until they were no longer capable, and those who could not work would be executed. Ultimately all were to die, envisioned as the "final solution" to the so-called "Jewish problem." Extermination camps were established at Auschwitz-Birkenau, Majdanek, Chelmno, Sobibor, Belzec and Treblinka. Ultimately the Nazis murdered over four million Jews. In addition they exterminated hundreds of thousands of gypsies, homosexuals, the mentally handicapped, the physically handicapped, and others they characterized as "undesirable".
160 | Event: Fall of Singapore | Date: 1942-02-15 | Tag: invasions, battles, wwii | Description: The Japanese attacked to seize strategic and mineral-rich Malaya beginning on 8 December 1941. The defending British, Indian and Australian troops were scattered to cover airfields and prospective landing sites, ill-equipped with respect to aircraft, artillery and armor, and poorly trained with respect to jungle warfare. The Japanese landed in and attacked through Thailand, outflanking Commonwealth defenses in northern Malaya. They skillfully infiltrated or enveloped jungle positions, often at night, integrating the liberal use of air strikes and armor thrusts down roads. They shifted their main axis of advance across the rugged interior to the west coast to further outflank the defenders. Japanese torpedo bombers sank the battleship HMS Prince of Wales and battle cruiser HMS Repulse, shocking the British Navy. By 31 January 1942 the Allies had retired into tiny Singapore Island. Japanese air and artillery attacks pounded the Allies while Japanese ground troops prepared for their final assault. The beleaguered defenders proved unable to defeat an amphibious assault across the Strait of Johore. The Japanese threw three divisions across, and rolled up Commonwealth defenses. On 15 February Singapore fell, and with it almost 140,000 killed, wounded or captured.
161 | Event: India-Burma Campaign | Date: 1942-04-02 | Tag: invasions, wwii | Description: By seizing Burma the Japanese cut off the last surface route available to the Allies providing supplies and assistance to China. The United States Tenth Air Force, newly activated in northeast India, began flying supplies over the treacherous Himalaya Mountains. The airmen who flew these missions dubbed their route the "Hump." An Allied offensive into northern Burma could reopen ground communications into China, and also seize airfields from which Japanese fighter planes threatened flights over the Himalayas. Burma was mountainous, heavily forested, and inundated by monsoon rains three months out of every year beginning in April. Adopting jungle tactics developed by Commonwealth "Chindits", the United States Army 5307th Composite Unit (Provisional) " "Merrill"s Marauders" " and Chinese units supplied by the Americans and based in India attacked beginning in October 1943. Overcoming enormous hardships, displaying brilliant tactics, and cooperating with local guerrillas, they rolled up successive Japanese positions and seized the critical airfield at Myitkyina on 17 May 1944. Meanwhile Commonwealth forces threw back Japanese counterattacks and advanced from Imphal and along the coast, and Chinese forces from Yunnan pushed down the old Burma Road. These drives linked up to liberate northern Burma. Ground convoys carrying supplies and equipment began rolling on a newly built road from Ledo, India through Burma to Kunming, China beginning on 28 January 1945.
164 | Event: India-Burma Campaign | Date: 1942-04-02 | Tag: invasions, wwii | Description: By seizing Burma the Japanese cut off the last surface route available to the Allies providing supplies and assistance to China. The United States Tenth Air Force, newly activated in northeast India, began flying supplies over the treacherous Himalaya Mountains. The airmen who flew these missions dubbed their route the "Hump." An Allied offensive into northern Burma could reopen ground communications into China, and also seize airfields from which Japanese fighter planes threatened flights over the Himalayas. Burma was mountainous, heavily forested, and inundated by monsoon rains three months out of every year beginning in April. Adopting jungle tactics developed by Commonwealth "Chindits", the United States Army 5307th Composite Unit (Provisional) " "Merrill"s Marauders" " and Chinese units supplied by the Americans and based in India attacked beginning in October 1943. Overcoming enormous hardships, displaying brilliant tactics, and cooperating with local guerrillas, they rolled up successive Japanese positions and seized the critical airfield at Myitkyina on 17 May 1944. Meanwhile Commonwealth forces threw back Japanese counterattacks and advanced from Imphal and along the coast, and Chinese forces from Yunnan pushed down the old Burma Road. These drives linked up to liberate northern Burma. Ground convoys carrying supplies and equipment began rolling on a newly built road from Ledo, India through Burma to Kunming, China beginning on 28 January 1945.
165 | Event: India-Burma Campaign | Date: 1942-04-02 | Tag: invasions, wwii | Description: By seizing Burma the Japanese cut off the last surface route available to the Allies providing supplies and assistance to China. The United States Tenth Air Force, newly activated in northeast India, began flying supplies over the treacherous Himalaya Mountains. The airmen who flew these missions dubbed their route the "Hump." An Allied offensive into northern Burma could reopen ground communications into China, and also seize airfields from which Japanese fighter planes threatened flights over the Himalayas. Burma was mountainous, heavily forested, and inundated by monsoon rains three months out of every year beginning in April. Adopting jungle tactics developed by Commonwealth "Chindits", the United States Army 5307th Composite Unit (Provisional) " "Merrill"s Marauders" " and Chinese units supplied by the Americans and based in India attacked beginning in October 1943. Overcoming enormous hardships, displaying brilliant tactics, and cooperating with local guerrillas, they rolled up successive Japanese positions and seized the critical airfield at Myitkyina on 17 May 1944. Meanwhile Commonwealth forces threw back Japanese counterattacks and advanced from Imphal and along the coast, and Chinese forces from Yunnan pushed down the old Burma Road. These drives linked up to liberate northern Burma. Ground convoys carrying supplies and equipment began rolling on a newly built road from Ledo, India through Burma to Kunming, China beginning on 28 January 1945.
166 | Event: India-Burma Campaign | Date: 1942-04-02 | Tag: invasions, wwii | Description: By seizing Burma the Japanese cut off the last surface route available to the Allies providing supplies and assistance to China. The United States Tenth Air Force, newly activated in northeast India, began flying supplies over the treacherous Himalaya Mountains. The airmen who flew these missions dubbed their route the "Hump." An Allied offensive into northern Burma could reopen ground communications into China, and also seize airfields from which Japanese fighter planes threatened flights over the Himalayas. Burma was mountainous, heavily forested, and inundated by monsoon rains three months out of every year beginning in April. Adopting jungle tactics developed by Commonwealth "Chindits", the United States Army 5307th Composite Unit (Provisional) " "Merrill"s Marauders" " and Chinese units supplied by the Americans and based in India attacked beginning in October 1943. Overcoming enormous hardships, displaying brilliant tactics, and cooperating with local guerrillas, they rolled up successive Japanese positions and seized the critical airfield at Myitkyina on 17 May 1944. Meanwhile Commonwealth forces threw back Japanese counterattacks and advanced from Imphal and along the coast, and Chinese forces from Yunnan pushed down the old Burma Road. These drives linked up to liberate northern Burma. Ground convoys carrying supplies and equipment began rolling on a newly built road from Ledo, India through Burma to Kunming, China beginning on 28 January 1945.
167 | Event: Air Offensive Japan Campaign | Date: 1942-04-17 | Tag: attacks, operations, wwii | Description: Mindful of the threat posed by strategic bombing, the Japanese seized a defensive perimeter across the Pacific far enough out to put American bombers based beyond it out of range of their home islands " or so they believed. On 18 April 1942 sixteen B-25B Mitchell bombers commanded by Lieutenant Colonel James H. Doolittle, USAAF, launched from the carrier USN Hornet and struck Tokyo and other Japanese cities. Physical damage was minimal, but the psychological impact stimulated the Japanese to further expand their defensive perimeter, becoming overextended as they did so. Offensives that carried American forces ever closer to Japan, and the introduction of the 1,500 mile range B-29 Superfortress bomber, rendered the Japanese home islands vulnerable to sustained strategic bombing. In June 1944 B-29 strikes out of China, supplied over the "Hump" from India, provoked the Japanese into further costly offensives in China. In July and August American forces seized Guam and Tinian in the Marianas Islands, bringing Japan into B-29 range from the Central Pacific. The seizures of Iwo Jima and Okinawa from February through June 1945 brought the B-29s even closer, and allowed fighter escorts to routinely accompany them. Beginning in February 1945 the Americans shifted from daylight high altitude bombing to low level bombing at night with incendiaries. During the night of 9-10 March 1945 incendiaries created a huge fire storm amidst the vulnerable wooden buildings of Tokyo, destroying much of the city. By June the Americans were capable of 6500 missions dropping 42,000 tons of bombs in a single month. "Conventional" firebombing devastated Japan"s major cities, while aerially delivered mines, air attacks and submarine war patrols destroyed Japanese shipping. On 6 August the first ever attack with an atomic bomb destroyed Hiroshima, and Nagasaki suffered the same fate three days later. On 14 August Emperor Hirohito committed to surrender, and the surrender document was signed on 2 September.
168 | Event: Air Offensive Japan Campaign | Date: 1942-04-17 | Tag: attacks, operations, wwii | Description: Mindful of the threat posed by strategic bombing, the Japanese seized a defensive perimeter across the Pacific far enough out to put American bombers based beyond it out of range of their home islands " or so they believed. On 18 April 1942 sixteen B-25B Mitchell bombers commanded by Lieutenant Colonel James H. Doolittle, USAAF, launched from the carrier USN Hornet and struck Tokyo and other Japanese cities. Physical damage was minimal, but the psychological impact stimulated the Japanese to further expand their defensive perimeter, becoming overextended as they did so. Offensives that carried American forces ever closer to Japan, and the introduction of the 1,500 mile range B-29 Superfortress bomber, rendered the Japanese home islands vulnerable to sustained strategic bombing. In June 1944 B-29 strikes out of China, supplied over the "Hump" from India, provoked the Japanese into further costly offensives in China. In July and August American forces seized Guam and Tinian in the Marianas Islands, bringing Japan into B-29 range from the Central Pacific. The seizures of Iwo Jima and Okinawa from February through June 1945 brought the B-29s even closer, and allowed fighter escorts to routinely accompany them. Beginning in February 1945 the Americans shifted from daylight high altitude bombing to low level bombing at night with incendiaries. During the night of 9-10 March 1945 incendiaries created a huge fire storm amidst the vulnerable wooden buildings of Tokyo, destroying much of the city. By June the Americans were capable of 6500 missions dropping 42,000 tons of bombs in a single month. "Conventional" firebombing devastated Japan"s major cities, while aerially delivered mines, air attacks and submarine war patrols destroyed Japanese shipping. On 6 August the first ever attack with an atomic bomb destroyed Hiroshima, and Nagasaki suffered the same fate three days later. On 14 August Emperor Hirohito committed to surrender, and the surrender document was signed on 2 September.
171 | Event: Aleutian Islands Campaign | Date: 1942-06-03 | Tag: invasions, battles, wwii | Description: Energized by their successes and stung by Colonel James H. Doolittle"s air raid on Tokyo, the Japanese determined to push their strategic perimeter out to include the westernmost Aleutian Islands and Midway Island. On 3 and 4 June a small Japanese naval task force, including two carriers, bombed Dutch Harbor in the Aleutians. In part this was to provide a diversion for the major sea battle they hoped to win around Midway. Instead they were soundly defeated at Midway. The Japanese nevertheless occupied Kiska and Attu Islands, building air bases and defending Kiska with 4,000 and Attu with 1,000 troops. The Americans reinforced their bases in the Aleutians and built new ones, while also building up ground strength and imposing an air and naval blockade on the Japanese garrisons. On 26 March 1943 a U.S. naval task force bested a Japanese flotilla in the Battle of the Komandorski Islands. From that point U.S. air and naval forces effectively isolated the Japanese on Kiska and Attu. On 11 May the American 7th Infantry Division landed on Attu, beginning a fierce three week battle for that island. Cold, fog, wetness, mud, rough terrain and cloud cover characteristic of the Aleutians rendered Attu particularly difficult to secure. Over 2,500 Japanese died in the fighting for Attu, and only 28 surrendered. The Americans lost 549 dead and 1,148 wounded, and also suffered 2,100 non-battle losses, most notably to trench foot. As a percentage of forces engaged, this was one of the costliest battles of World War II. Learning lessons from Attu, the Americans methodically prepared for an even larger invasion of Kiska. They landed on Kiska on 15 August and cleared it by 24 August, discovering that the Japanese had already evacuated. The Aleutian Islands Campaign represents the only ground fighting during World War II in the western hemisphere or on American soil.
172 | Event: Aleutian Islands Campaign | Date: 1942-06-03 | Tag: invasions, battles, wwii | Description: Energized by their successes and stung by Colonel James H. Doolittle"s air raid on Tokyo, the Japanese determined to push their strategic perimeter out to include the westernmost Aleutian Islands and Midway Island. On 3 and 4 June a small Japanese naval task force, including two carriers, bombed Dutch Harbor in the Aleutians. In part this was to provide a diversion for the major sea battle they hoped to win around Midway. Instead they were soundly defeated at Midway. The Japanese nevertheless occupied Kiska and Attu Islands, building air bases and defending Kiska with 4,000 and Attu with 1,000 troops. The Americans reinforced their bases in the Aleutians and built new ones, while also building up ground strength and imposing an air and naval blockade on the Japanese garrisons. On 26 March 1943 a U.S. naval task force bested a Japanese flotilla in the Battle of the Komandorski Islands. From that point U.S. air and naval forces effectively isolated the Japanese on Kiska and Attu. On 11 May the American 7th Infantry Division landed on Attu, beginning a fierce three week battle for that island. Cold, fog, wetness, mud, rough terrain and cloud cover characteristic of the Aleutians rendered Attu particularly difficult to secure. Over 2,500 Japanese died in the fighting for Attu, and only 28 surrendered. The Americans lost 549 dead and 1,148 wounded, and also suffered 2,100 non-battle losses, most notably to trench foot. As a percentage of forces engaged, this was one of the costliest battles of World War II. Learning lessons from Attu, the Americans methodically prepared for an even larger invasion of Kiska. They landed on Kiska on 15 August and cleared it by 24 August, discovering that the Japanese had already evacuated. The Aleutian Islands Campaign represents the only ground fighting during World War II in the western hemisphere or on American soil.
175 | Event: Battle of Midway | Date: 1942-06-04 | Tag: battles, attacks, wwii | Description: Midway was the decisive battle of the Central Pacific Campaign (7 December 1941 - 6 December 1943), and a pivotal turning point in World War II. After their successful attack on Pearl Harbor, Japanese offensives ranged widely through the Pacific and Indian Oceans. The Japanese nevertheless needed to destroy the American fleet in the Central Pacific to secure their holdings. They landed in the Aleutians to divert American attention, and then initiated an assault on Midway Island to draw in the American fleet. The Americans had broken Japanese naval codes sufficiently to develop invaluable intelligence. Avoiding a surface battle against the numerically superior Japanese fleet, they attacked the Japanese carriers by air while the Japanese planes were bombing Midway, or replenishing themselves upon having returned to their carriers. Low level American torpedo bombers took heavy losses, but sufficiently diverted the Japanese defenders to create an opening through which dive bombers plunged in from high altitudes. The Americans sank four aircraft carriers while losing one. The losses of carriers, planes and skilled airmen proved catastrophic to the Japanese.
176 | Event: Egypt-Libya Campaign | Date: 1942-06-11 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: Beginning in September 1940 Commonwealth forces battled the Italians, and later the Italians and Germans, to secure Egypt. See-saw offensives and counter-offensives swept back and forth across Cyrenaica. By June 1942 Axis forces commanded by General Erwin J. E. Rommel advanced into Egypt, threatening the vital Suez Canal, Middle Eastern oil supplies, and logistical routes into the Soviet Union. Commonwealth forces established a defensive line running south from El Alamein, and beat back fierce Axis attacks in July, August and September. The Germans and Italians then dug in opposite the Allies. Meanwhile Commonwealth forces in Egypt, now commanded by General Bernard L. Montgomery, built up their strength. They profited from American lend-lease equipment and supplies, in addition to reinforcement from other sources. Lend-lease particularly provided tanks, artillery and trucks to Commonwealth crews. An American air force that ultimately grew to four bomber groups and three fighter groups participated in the fighting, interdicting Axis port operations and supply lines and flying combat support missions. In October Montgomery went over to the offensive and broke through Axis lines. He pushed on across North Africa, crossing into Tunisia to link up with Allied forces that had advanced from Morocco and Algeria.
179 | Event: Egypt-Libya Campaign | Date: 1942-06-11 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: Beginning in September 1940 Commonwealth forces battled the Italians, and later the Italians and Germans, to secure Egypt. See-saw offensives and counter-offensives swept back and forth across Cyrenaica. By June 1942 Axis forces commanded by General Erwin J. E. Rommel advanced into Egypt, threatening the vital Suez Canal, Middle Eastern oil supplies, and logistical routes into the Soviet Union. Commonwealth forces established a defensive line running south from El Alamein, and beat back fierce Axis attacks in July, August and September. The Germans and Italians then dug in opposite the Allies. Meanwhile Commonwealth forces in Egypt, now commanded by General Bernard L. Montgomery, built up their strength. They profited from American lend-lease equipment and supplies, in addition to reinforcement from other sources. Lend-lease particularly provided tanks, artillery and trucks to Commonwealth crews. An American air force that ultimately grew to four bomber groups and three fighter groups participated in the fighting, interdicting Axis port operations and supply lines and flying combat support missions. In October Montgomery went over to the offensive and broke through Axis lines. He pushed on across North Africa, crossing into Tunisia to link up with Allied forces that had advanced from Morocco and Algeria.
180 | Event: Air Offensive Europe Campaign | Date: 1942-07-04 | Tag: operations, attacks, wwii | Description: Recovering from the Battle of Britain (2 July - 17 September 1940) and the "Blitz" (7 September 1940 " 11 May 1941), the Royal Air Force undertook large scale offensive fighter sweeps into France and stepped up its strategic bombing of German cities, industries and facilities. American bombers and crews joined the British beginning on 4 July 1942. Both Allies steadily expanded their strategic bombing capabilities, with the Americans expanding at a more rapid rate. By mid-1943 the Allies achieved a division of labor wherein the Americans conducted precision bombing during daylight and the British area bombing at night, hammering the Germans around the clock. Deep American daylight raids, such as one on Schweinfurt on 14 October 1943, proved prohibitively costly until the Americans perfected a long range fighter to escort their bombers to distant targets. This capability was achieved in December 1943 with the P-51 Mustang, upgraded for a considerably greater range. In that same month both the British and the American air forces dropped 12,000 tons of bombs in attacks ranging as deep as Berlin and beyond. Advances in the Mediterranean opened up airfields complimenting those in Great Britain, permitting shuttling between theaters and exposing more German territory to strategic bombing. Constant battering and expensive defensive efforts drained German resources, while their cities underwent horrific destruction. By the time of the Normandy landings the German air force was decimated, and attacks targeting fuel facilities dramatically eroded their capabilities for mechanized warfare. When the Combined Bomber Offensive ended on 12 April 1945, the Americans had dropped 1,388,000 tons of bombs and the British 988,000 on Germany " at the cost of 110,000 airmen from both nations lost in action.
181 | Event: China Defense Campaign | Date: 1942-07-04 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: Japan had been at war in China since 1931. China"s poorly equipped army was outclassed by the modernized Japanese, and suffered from political discord as well. In addition to fighting the Japanese, Nationalist Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek fought off and on with forces of the Chinese Communist Party and had only nominal control over semi-autonomous warlords who controlled much of his army. Nevertheless, the war in China tied down a major fraction of the Japanese Army. Allied planners considered it vital to keep them committed in that theater. Japan"s naval dominance and its seizure of the Philippines, French Indo-China and Burma in 1941-1942 isolated China from all but a trickle of supplies flown over the Himalaya Mountains (the "Hump") from India. American advisors to Chiang debated whether to prioritize using these supplies to build up Chinese armies for ground offensives or to sustain American air offensives from Chinese airfields against Japanese forces, supply lines and home islands. Chiang favored air offensives, and as the volume of supplies flown over the Hump increased these became more damaging and distracting to the Japanese. The Japanese brought their forces committed in China up to 820,000 men, and in April 1944 launched the ICHI-GO Offensive to overrun airfields being used by the Americans and to secure rail communications across China into Indo-China. In this they succeeded, but in the process over-extended themselves and diverted resources from other theaters. In January 1945 the Allies liberated Burma and reopened the "Burma Road" into Kunming, China. Supplies rolled in. Desperate to reverse this refurbishment, the Japanese launched yet another offensive into Western Hunan Province in April 1945. The Chinese held and, reinforced by newly equipped units, drove the Japanese back. The Japanese were now on the defensive as their situation deteriorated in this and other theaters.
182 | Event: Air Offensive Europe Campaign | Date: 1942-07-04 | Tag: operations, attacks, wwii | Description: Recovering from the Battle of Britain (2 July - 17 September 1940) and the "Blitz" (7 September 1940 " 11 May 1941), the Royal Air Force undertook large scale offensive fighter sweeps into France and stepped up its strategic bombing of German cities, industries and facilities. American bombers and crews joined the British beginning on 4 July 1942. Both Allies steadily expanded their strategic bombing capabilities, with the Americans expanding at a more rapid rate. By mid-1943 the Allies achieved a division of labor wherein the Americans conducted precision bombing during daylight and the British area bombing at night, hammering the Germans around the clock. Deep American daylight raids, such as one on Schweinfurt on 14 October 1943, proved prohibitively costly until the Americans perfected a long range fighter to escort their bombers to distant targets. This capability was achieved in December 1943 with the P-51 Mustang, upgraded for a considerably greater range. In that same month both the British and the American air forces dropped 12,000 tons of bombs in attacks ranging as deep as Berlin and beyond. Advances in the Mediterranean opened up airfields complimenting those in Great Britain, permitting shuttling between theaters and exposing more German territory to strategic bombing. Constant battering and expensive defensive efforts drained German resources, while their cities underwent horrific destruction. By the time of the Normandy landings the German air force was decimated, and attacks targeting fuel facilities dramatically eroded their capabilities for mechanized warfare. When the Combined Bomber Offensive ended on 12 April 1945, the Americans had dropped 1,388,000 tons of bombs and the British 988,000 on Germany " at the cost of 110,000 airmen from both nations lost in action.
183 | Event: China Defense Campaign | Date: 1942-07-04 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: Japan had been at war in China since 1931. China"s poorly equipped army was outclassed by the modernized Japanese, and suffered from political discord as well. In addition to fighting the Japanese, Nationalist Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek fought off and on with forces of the Chinese Communist Party and had only nominal control over semi-autonomous warlords who controlled much of his army. Nevertheless, the war in China tied down a major fraction of the Japanese Army. Allied planners considered it vital to keep them committed in that theater. Japan"s naval dominance and its seizure of the Philippines, French Indo-China and Burma in 1941-1942 isolated China from all but a trickle of supplies flown over the Himalaya Mountains (the "Hump") from India. American advisors to Chiang debated whether to prioritize using these supplies to build up Chinese armies for ground offensives or to sustain American air offensives from Chinese airfields against Japanese forces, supply lines and home islands. Chiang favored air offensives, and as the volume of supplies flown over the Hump increased these became more damaging and distracting to the Japanese. The Japanese brought their forces committed in China up to 820,000 men, and in April 1944 launched the ICHI-GO Offensive to overrun airfields being used by the Americans and to secure rail communications across China into Indo-China. In this they succeeded, but in the process over-extended themselves and diverted resources from other theaters. In January 1945 the Allies liberated Burma and reopened the "Burma Road" into Kunming, China. Supplies rolled in. Desperate to reverse this refurbishment, the Japanese launched yet another offensive into Western Hunan Province in April 1945. The Chinese held and, reinforced by newly equipped units, drove the Japanese back. The Japanese were now on the defensive as their situation deteriorated in this and other theaters.
184 | Event: Papua Campaign | Date: 1942-07-23 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: Following up on earlier successes, the Japanese resolved to seize Port Moresby in Papua, New Guinea, a base from which they could threaten Australia and supply lines supporting it. A Japanese amphibious effort in May 1942 turned back after the Japanese failure to secure sea control in the Battle of the Coral Sea. Taking an alternate approach, on 21 July the Japanese landed at Buna on the northern coast of Papua, and set out along the Kokoda Trail over the formidable Owen Stanley Mountains to seize Port Moresby, on the southern coast. Australian forces had been hastily reinforced by two Australian divisions returned from the Middle East and two American divisions shipped across the Pacific. Allied contingents reinforced Port Moresby and set up a forward base at Milne Bay. They repulsed a Japanese attack on Milne Bay with heavy losses, and the Japanese on the Kokoda Trail retired over the Owen Stanley Mountains. The Allies went over to the offensive and converged on Buna and nearby Gona, dropping supplies from the air to compensate for extremely difficult terrain and vegetation. The jungle proved unhealthy, and for periods units operated with as little as a third of their manpower due to disease and disability. The Japanese had constructed formidable, artfully camouflaged, defenses, and repulsed initial Allied attacks with heavy losses. The Allies built up manpower and supplies, and improved upon jungle tactical techniques. Combined arms teams of artillery, tanks and infantry cracked the Japanese defenses a bunker at a time. After hard fighting, the Allies wiped out the last Japanese stronghold in Papua on 22 January 1943.
185 | Event: Papua Campaign | Date: 1942-07-23 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: Following up on earlier successes, the Japanese resolved to seize Port Moresby in Papua, New Guinea, a base from which they could threaten Australia and supply lines supporting it. A Japanese amphibious effort in May 1942 turned back after the Japanese failure to secure sea control in the Battle of the Coral Sea. Taking an alternate approach, on 21 July the Japanese landed at Buna on the northern coast of Papua, and set out along the Kokoda Trail over the formidable Owen Stanley Mountains to seize Port Moresby, on the southern coast. Australian forces had been hastily reinforced by two Australian divisions returned from the Middle East and two American divisions shipped across the Pacific. Allied contingents reinforced Port Moresby and set up a forward base at Milne Bay. They repulsed a Japanese attack on Milne Bay with heavy losses, and the Japanese on the Kokoda Trail retired over the Owen Stanley Mountains. The Allies went over to the offensive and converged on Buna and nearby Gona, dropping supplies from the air to compensate for extremely difficult terrain and vegetation. The jungle proved unhealthy, and for periods units operated with as little as a third of their manpower due to disease and disability. The Japanese had constructed formidable, artfully camouflaged, defenses, and repulsed initial Allied attacks with heavy losses. The Allies built up manpower and supplies, and improved upon jungle tactical techniques. Combined arms teams of artillery, tanks and infantry cracked the Japanese defenses a bunker at a time. After hard fighting, the Allies wiped out the last Japanese stronghold in Papua on 22 January 1943.
186 | Event: Guadalcanal Campaign | Date: 1942-08-07 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: Following up on early successes the Japanese pushed into the Solomon Islands, resolved to expose Allied supply lines connecting North America with Australia to attacks by sea and air. On 7 August 1942 the Americans counterattacked. U.S. Navy and Coast Guard amphibious craft landed the 1st Marine Division on Guadalcanal to seize a strategic Japanese airfield. This they renamed Henderson Field. Smaller landing forces secured nearby Tulagi, Florida and Tanambogo-Gavutu Islands. Guadalcanal was mountainous, heavily forested, hot, humid, wet and infested with malaria and dengue fever. The Japanese reinforced Guadalcanal by sea, but the Marines threw back their attacks in savage fighting. Both sides struggled to reinforce, often with surreptitious landings at night, while see-saw naval and air combat erupted around the island. Four major naval engagements took place in the vicinity of Savo Island. The Japanese again mounted major ground assaults during the period 23-26 October, and again were repulsed with heavy losses. The advantage shifted to the Americans, who poured in reinforcements, intercepted convoys attempting to reinforce the Japanese, and resumed the offensive. The Japanese suffered horribly from disease and hunger as well as American attacks. By mid-February 1943 the Japanese Navy evacuated survivors in daring night operations, ceding control of the island to the Americans.
187 | Event: Guadalcanal Campaign | Date: 1942-08-07 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: Following up on early successes the Japanese pushed into the Solomon Islands, resolved to expose Allied supply lines connecting North America with Australia to attacks by sea and air. On 7 August 1942 the Americans counterattacked. U.S. Navy and Coast Guard amphibious craft landed the 1st Marine Division on Guadalcanal to seize a strategic Japanese airfield. This they renamed Henderson Field. Smaller landing forces secured nearby Tulagi, Florida and Tanambogo-Gavutu Islands. Guadalcanal was mountainous, heavily forested, hot, humid, wet and infested with malaria and dengue fever. The Japanese reinforced Guadalcanal by sea, but the Marines threw back their attacks in savage fighting. Both sides struggled to reinforce, often with surreptitious landings at night, while see-saw naval and air combat erupted around the island. Four major naval engagements took place in the vicinity of Savo Island. The Japanese again mounted major ground assaults during the period 23-26 October, and again were repulsed with heavy losses. The advantage shifted to the Americans, who poured in reinforcements, intercepted convoys attempting to reinforce the Japanese, and resumed the offensive. The Japanese suffered horribly from disease and hunger as well as American attacks. By mid-February 1943 the Japanese Navy evacuated survivors in daring night operations, ceding control of the island to the Americans.
188 | Event: Dieppe | Date: 1942-08-19 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: Having withdrawn from France in 1940, the western Allies were under pressure from the embattled Soviet Union to draw off German forces from the East by opening a "Second Front." Although not yet prepared for a major invasion, the Allies resolved to seize a single port, probably temporarily. The operation was to test German reactions and defenses, experiment with amphibious techniques, and draw the Luftwaffe into a losing battle with Allied air forces. The ground invading force numbered about 6,000, built around the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division. Commandoes got ashore and neutralized flanking artillery batteries, but the element of surprise was compromised. The main landing forces encountered well prepared defenses and fierce opposition. Allied fighter planes operated at extended ranges and thus had limited dwell time. Their losses greatly exceeded those of the Germans, and they did not achieve air supremacy. The Allies lost 1,027 killed and 2,340 captured, and withdrew from the beaches before noon. The mission proved a costly failure. It did provide lessons that the Allies drew upon when designing future amphibious operations.
189 | Event: Battle of Stalingrad | Date: 1942-09-01 | Tag: battles, wwii | Description: After Soviet counter-attacks beginning in December 1941 drove the Germans back from Moscow, both sides became exhausted in the see-saw winter warfare that followed. Hitler resolved to refurbish his tattered armies and focus a spring offensive in a different direction, toward the oil-rich Caucasus. The German attack kicked off on 28 June and enjoyed initial success. The Germans seized Voronezh, closed to the Don River, captured Sevastopol, secured Rostov, and pushed on across the Don River and the Strait of Kerch to the ramparts of the Caucasus. Soviet resistance stiffened in the defense of Grozny and the mountain passes, and at the opposite flank of the offensive at the city of Stalingrad on the Volga River. Hitler was determined to push on to the Volga, but to do so required fighting from building to building through thirty miles of urban sprawl. The Soviets heavily reinforced Stalingrad, and bitter city fighting dragged on into the winter. German technological and maneuver advantages counted for less at close quarters in confused urban fighting. As their better units were drawn in, they turned lengthy sectors flanking the city over to allied troops, who were generally less well equipped and trained. The Soviets steadily built up massive counter-attack forces. In November they smashed through weakened Axis lines north and south of Stalingrad and surrounded the city. Soviet advances forced a hasty German retreat from the Caucasus. The Germans isolated in Stalingrad fought stubbornly but ultimately capitulated, a disaster that cost Hitler a total of over 300,000 men.
190 | Event: Battle of Stalingrad | Date: 1942-09-01 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: After Soviet counter-attacks beginning in December 1941 drove the Germans back from Moscow, both sides became exhausted in the see-saw winter warfare that followed. Hitler resolved to refurbish his tattered armies and focus a spring offensive in a different direction, toward the oil-rich Caucasus. The German attack kicked off on 28 June and enjoyed initial success. The Germans seized Voronezh, closed to the Don River, captured Sevastopol, secured Rostov, and pushed on across the Don River and the Strait of Kerch to the ramparts of the Caucasus. Soviet resistance stiffened in the defense of Grozny and the mountain passes, and at the opposite flank of the offensive at the city of Stalingrad on the Volga River. Hitler was determined to push on to the Volga, but to do so required fighting from building to building through thirty miles of urban sprawl. The Soviets heavily reinforced Stalingrad, and bitter city fighting dragged on into the winter. German technological and maneuver advantages counted for less at close quarters in confused urban fighting. As their better units were drawn in, they turned lengthy sectors flanking the city over to allied troops, who were generally less well equipped and trained. The Soviets steadily built up massive counter-attack forces. In November they smashed through weakened Axis lines north and south of Stalingrad and surrounded the city. Soviet advances forced a hasty German retreat from the Caucasus. The Germans isolated in Stalingrad fought stubbornly but ultimately capitulated, a disaster that cost Hitler a total of over 300,000 men.
191 | Event: Manhattan Project to Build an Atomic Bomb | Date: 1942-09-17 | Tag: developments, wwii | Description: The United States Government mobilized scientists and engineers to assist the war effort, pouring millions of dollars into universities and laboratories. Of numerous projects to harness scientific knowledge, none was more elaborate or consequential than the so-called "Manhattan Project" to build an atomic bomb. Since the first decades of the twentieth century scientists speculated that enormous energy could be generated by sustained atomic fission. A number of these scientists were German Jews who fled Adolf Hitler"s tyranny. In 1939 Doctors Albert Einstein and Leo Szilard authored a letter advising President Franklin D. Roosevelt to develop a weapon relying upon atomic fission. They feared Nazi Germany had or would initiate such a program. Scientists in a number of disparate locations began working pieces of the puzzle. On 17 September Colonel (soon Brigadier General) Leslie R. Groves was given command of the Manhattan Engineering District and empowered to direct all efforts to build an atomic bomb. General Groves appointed physicist Doctor Robert J. Oppenheimer to coordinate scientific research, and built huge secret facilities at Oak Ridge, Tennessee and Los Alamos, New Mexico. Ultimately the project achieved the first man-made nuclear explosion at Alamogordo, New Mexico on 16 July, 1945.
192 | Event: Algeria-French Morocco Campaign | Date: 1942-11-08 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: American President Franklin D. Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Winston S. Churchill were eager to seize the initiative and strike an effective blow against Nazi Germany, especially since their Soviet allies were reeling in the face of massive offensives. After some debate, the western Allies agreed to an invasion of North Africa " Operation TORCH. Such an invasion seemed within the means then available, would open Mediterranean shipping routes to vital Middle Eastern oil and other points east, would deploy in the rear of Panzerarmee Afrika fighting in Libya and Egypt, and seemed likely to bring French forces into the alliance. American task forces landed on beaches flanking Casablanca and Oran, and an Anglo-American task force similarly attacked Algiers. Near Casablanca and Oran resistance was significant at first, but force and diplomacy induced the Vichy French to surrender. In Algiers a pro-Allied uprising enabled the landing force to take the city with minimal conflict. The Allies enjoyed overwhelming naval supremacy, and achieved air supremacy through naval aviation and planes flown from the British airfield on Gibraltar. By 11 November resistance had ceased. French Admiral Jean Francois Darlan assumed governmental authority in North Africa. In due course most Vichy forces in Africa joined the Allies as Free French.
193 | Event: Tunisia Campaign | Date: 1942-11-17 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: Victorious in both Algeria-French Morocco and Libya-Egypt, American and Commonwealth forces pressed into Tunisia, incorporating Free French units and hoping to trap the retreating Panzerarmee Afrika between them. Germany hastily intervened, overrunning what remained of Vichy France and occupying Tunisia with German and Italian forces. The Germans reacted quickly and effectively, bringing the Allies to a stalemate along the Dorsal Mountains by 1 January 1943. Taking advantage of the short sea route from Sicily, temporary air parity, their central position, and the fact that General Erwin J. E Rommel"s Panzerarmee Afrika arrived in Tunisia before General Bernard L. Montgomery"s pursuing Eighth Army caught up with it, the Germans seized the initiative. A series of attacks provoked see-saw battles near Bou Arada, Robaa, Fondouk, and Faid. An offensive culminating in the Battle of the Kasserine Pass inflicted an embarrassing tactical defeat upon the Americans. Green American forces learned lessons from the battlefield and gained in tactical proficiency. The leadership of Generals George S. Patton Jr. and Omar N. Bradley proved critical in this regard. In early March the Allies repulsed separate German attacks in the vicinity of Medjez el Bab and Medenine with heavy losses. The Allies went over to the offensive, grinding their way forward on multiple axes along the front. Allied air and naval superiority isolated the theater as their forces closed in on Bizerte and Tunis. Effective resistance ceased on 13 May with an Axis surrender. The Axis lost 70,000 casualties and 238,000 prisoners, as compared to 76,000 casualties for the Allies. This disaster, coupled with the loss at Stalingrad several months earlier, threw the Germans onto the strategic defensive.
194 | Event: New Guinea Campaign | Date: 1943-01-24 | Tag: battles, operations, invasions, wwii | Description: After the bloody fighting of the Papua Campaign (23 July 1942 - 23 January 1943), American and Australian forces were in possession of Buna and other outposts in western New Guinea. The Japanese controlled the bulk of the island, and decided to reinforce their forces there and resume the offensive. Allied cryptanalysts had cracked some Japanese naval codes, and the Allies inflicted huge losses on Japanese convoys attempting to reinforce New Guinea. A grinding, largely Australian ground offensive repelled Japanese counterattacks at Wau and pushed on towards Lae. The combatants endured bitter fighting, thick jungles, challenging mountain topography, and horrific losses to malaria and other diseases. American forces built up naval and air superiority, and brought their ever growing and improved ground forces ashore in a series of amphibious landings. The first of these threatened Salamaua in June and isolated Lae in September. The Japanese retired through mountainous terrain, suffering major attrition en route. The Americans repeatedly bypassed and isolated troop concentrations with amphibious and airborne landings, building airfields at their new locations, and forcing further withdrawals. Landings and operations at Finschhafen, Saidor, Wewak-Aitape, Woodlark Island, Hollandia, Sarmi and Sansapor successively turned or compromised Japanese positions while providing bases for further advances. Dramatic improvements in medical techniques, prophylaxis, and discipline radically reduced Allied losses to disease. The Allies suffered 34,000 casualties, while the Japanese lost 110,000 dead. The Japanese left 125,000 stranded in bypassed garrisons, jungle retreats and ports, most notably those of New Britain and Rabaul.
195 | Event: New Guinea Campaign | Date: 1943-01-24 | Tag: battles, operations, invasions, wwii | Description: After the bloody fighting of the Papua Campaign (23 July 1942 - 23 January 1943), American and Australian forces were in possession of Buna and other outposts in western New Guinea. The Japanese controlled the bulk of the island, and decided to reinforce their forces there and resume the offensive. Allied cryptanalysts had cracked some Japanese naval codes, and the Allies inflicted huge losses on Japanese convoys attempting to reinforce New Guinea. A grinding, largely Australian ground offensive repelled Japanese counterattacks at Wau and pushed on towards Lae. The combatants endured bitter fighting, thick jungles, challenging mountain topography, and horrific losses to malaria and other diseases. American forces built up naval and air superiority, and brought their ever growing and improved ground forces ashore in a series of amphibious landings. The first of these threatened Salamaua in June and isolated Lae in September. The Japanese retired through mountainous terrain, suffering major attrition en route. The Americans repeatedly bypassed and isolated troop concentrations with amphibious and airborne landings, building airfields at their new locations, and forcing further withdrawals. Landings and operations at Finschhafen, Saidor, Wewak-Aitape, Woodlark Island, Hollandia, Sarmi and Sansapor successively turned or compromised Japanese positions while providing bases for further advances. Dramatic improvements in medical techniques, prophylaxis, and discipline radically reduced Allied losses to disease. The Allies suffered 34,000 casualties, while the Japanese lost 110,000 dead. The Japanese left 125,000 stranded in bypassed garrisons, jungle retreats and ports, most notably those of New Britain and Rabaul.
196 | Event: Northern Solomons Campaign | Date: 1943-02-22 | Tag: battles, operations, invasions, wwii | Description: After Allied victories in the Guadalcanal Campaign (7 August 1942 " 21 February 1943) and Papua Campaign (23 July 1942 " 23 January 1943), the Japanese fell back on New Georgia, and resolved to defend it and islands to the north. The Allies determined to advance through both New Guinea and the Solomons to isolate the major Japanese base at Rabaul. On 30 June 1943 American soldiers and marines landed to seize four islands and outposts surrounding New Georgia. Here they built airfields and positioned artillery and supplies to support an attack on New Georgia proper, with the major base at Munda as a final objective. Landing both north and east of Munda in July, the Americans found themselves facing a determined opponent in a horrific environment. Dysentery, malaria and "jungle rot" debilitated large numbers of troops. Incessant rain, tortured terrain and dense jungle foliage hampered operations. Camouflaged Japanese positions were strongly built, and virtually impossible to detect until at close range. Savage fighting in close terrain exacted a heavy physical and psychological toll, but the Americans pushed through Munda to secure the island. After further hard fighting for Baanga and Arundel, the Americans bypassed 12,000 Japanese strongly entrenched on Kolombangara and attacked lightly defended Vella Lavella fifteen miles further north. They quickly put it to use as an airbase proximate to the strategically dominant island of Bougainville. Meanwhile the U. S. Navy fought supporting surface battles at Vella Lavella, Vella Gulf, Kolombangara, and Kula Gulf, losing several ships but virtually halting the flow of Japanese seaborne reinforcements. Naval amphibious forces landed American soldiers and marines around Empress Augusta Bay on western Bougainville in November. The Japanese mounted furious counterattacks, but American firepower decimated these. The Americans pursued the Japanese into Bougainville"s vast jungles, but concentrated on preparations for the liberation of the Philippines. In December 1944 control of Bougainville passed to the Australian armed forces.
197 | Event: German U-Boats Break Contact in North Atlantic | Date: 1943-05-22 | Tag: operations, developments, wwii | Description: Allied success in Europe hinged on moving troops and supplies across the Atlantic. For the United States, the core contribution in this regard was the United States Antisubmarine Campaign (7 Dec. 1941 - 2 Sept. 1945). New technologies like radar, sonar and improved depth charges entered service. Merchant ships sailed in convoys protected by convoy escorts and antisubmarine warfare ships and planes. Code-breaking and captured encryption machines provided critical information. During 1942 the situation reached a precarious point, with the Allies losing 800,000 tons of shipping more than they replaced. In 1943 the balance tipped in favor of the Allies. Increasingly effective Allied antisubmarine forces sank 41 of 240 German U-Boats in May of that year. Factors in Allied success included better designed escorts, more skillful escort groups, and scientific analysis coupled with battlefield experience that produced more effective equipment and tactics. New weapons such as the anti-submarine mortar and homing torpedoes dropped by aircraft came into widespread use. On 22 May German Admiral Karl Donitz ordered U-Boats in the North Atlantic to break off operations to avoid further catastrophic losses. This proved a pivotal event. Donitz hoped technological developments or a change in the strategic situation might allow the U-Boats to resume operations at less of a disadvantage. Meanwhile the Allies exploited the Atlantic sea lanes with increasing volumes of traffic and the U-Boat menace receded.
198 | Event: Kursk | Date: 1943-07-05 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: After their disastrous defeat at Stalingrad during the winter of 1942-1943, the Germans retreated across the Russian steppe before stabilizing their lines with limited counterattacks and masterful maneuvers. During the spring both armies reorganized and refurbished. The Soviets had gained control of an expansive salient centered on the city of Kursk. The Germans resolved to crush this with converging attacks from their own salients centered on Orel to the north and Kharkov to the south. A quick limited blow was to inflict maximum casualties on the Soviets and to cripple their offensive plans. The Soviets anticipated the German attacks, and constructed extensive defenses in depth around Kursk while amassing powerful counterattack forces of their own. German attacks began on 5 July, and ground slowly forward while taking heavy losses. On 11 July the Soviets launched massive counterattacks against the weakened Germans, precipitating the largest tank battle of Word War II at Prokhorovka the following day. By 23 July the Germans had been driven back across their starting positions, and had lost ground on their flanks as well. Although the Soviets had taken heavy losses too, the strategic initiative irrevocably passed to them on the Eastern Front.
199 | Event: Sicily Campaign | Date: 1943-07-09 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: Having destroyed sizeable German and Italian forces in the Tunisia Campaign (17 November 1942 " 13 May 1943), Allied planners resolved to seize Sicily. This invasion would secure Mediterranean Sea shipping lanes, and perhaps force Italy out of the war. A preliminary air campaign secured air superiority for the Allies. On 10 July the United States Navy landed the Seventh Army with three reinforced divisions around Gela on Sicily"s southern coast. The British Eighth Army was landed with four reinforced divisions south of Syracuse on Sicily"s east coast. In both cases airborne landings seized advanced positions and disrupted defenses. The Germans and Italians launched counterattacks, most notably toward Gela, but the Allies repulsed them. The Allies secured a continuous front from Agrigento to Augusta by 15 July. The Germans and Italians made skillful use of rough terrain augmented by minefields, but American forces in multiple columns overran western Sicily while the British fixed formidable German forces around Catania. Threatened by ever-growing Allied forces on multiple axes and by amphibious envelopments, the Germans and Italians decided to withdraw. Fighting a skillful delaying action, they evacuated 100,000 (out of an original total of 350,000) troops from the island during the period 3-16 August. These included three German mechanized divisions, their best and most mobile forces. Less mobile infantry and coastal defense units generally surrendered. On 25 July Italian dictator Benito Mussolini was deposed in favor of an Italian government that soon sought peace. The fighting in Sicily ended with the Allied seizure of Messina on 17 August.
200 | Event: Naples-Foggia Campaign
202 | | Date: 1943-08-18 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: After driving the Germans and Italians from Sicily in the Sicily Campaign (9 July " 17 August 1943), the Allies resolved to push on into Italy. This would consolidate Italian withdrawal from the war, tie down German forces in anticipation of the invasion to liberate France, and provide strategically located airfields to broaden the bombing campaign against Germany. The British crossed the Strait of Messina on 3 September, and the Italians signed an armistice on the same day. The Germans poured in troops, disarmed their erstwhile Italian allies and, with considerable effort, replaced Italian garrisons in France and the Balkans. On 9 September an Anglo-American force of three reinforced divisions invaded amphibiously through beaches around Salerno, intending to cut off German forces withdrawing from the British in southern Italy and to hasten the seizure of the port of Naples and airfields at Foggia. The Germans put up determined resistance around Salerno, and counterattacked fiercely with armored forces on 13 September. The Allies turned back these counterattacks in desperate fighting, and then poured further troops ashore to reinforce the beachhead. On 16 September units from the Salerno beachhead and others advancing from the toe of Italy linked up, and the Germans withdrew to a series of delaying positions they had constructed across the width of Italy. These were designed to take advantage of tough mountainous terrain, numerous streams and rivers, thick minefields, and artfully positioned defenses. Winter rains and intemperate weather made the campaign more arduous. The Americans occupied Naples on 1 October. Despite devastation inflicted during the German withdrawal, American engineers had the port once again operating at capacity within a week. Meanwhile the British had secured the Foggia airfields. The offensive ground on in the face of horrific conditions and heavy casualties. The Allies fought major battles to force the Volturno River, close to the Sangro River, seize Ortona, and force passages through the Mignano Gap and in the vicinity of San Pietro. By 17 January they closed to the formidable Gustav Line, a German defensive belt running across Italy from the Gulf of Gaeta to the Adriatic Sea " and including the famous Monte Cassino.
205 | Event: Naples-Foggia Campaign | Date: 1943-08-18 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: After driving the Germans and Italians from Sicily in the Sicily Campaign (9 July " 17 August 1943), the Allies resolved to push on into Italy. This would consolidate Italian withdrawal from the war, tie down German forces in anticipation of the invasion to liberate France, and provide strategically located airfields to broaden the bombing campaign against Germany. The British crossed the Strait of Messina on 3 September, and the Italians signed an armistice on the same day. The Germans poured in troops, disarmed their erstwhile Italian allies and, with considerable effort, replaced Italian garrisons in France and the Balkans. On 9 September an Anglo-American force of three reinforced divisions invaded amphibiously through beaches around Salerno, intending to cut off German forces withdrawing from the British in southern Italy and to hasten the seizure of the port of Naples and airfields at Foggia. The Germans put up determined resistance around Salerno, and counterattacked fiercely with armored forces on 13 September. The Allies turned back these counterattacks in desperate fighting, and then poured further troops ashore to reinforce the beachhead. On 16 September units from the Salerno beachhead and others advancing from the toe of Italy linked up, and the Germans withdrew to a series of delaying positions they had constructed across the width of Italy. These were designed to take advantage of tough mountainous terrain, numerous streams and rivers, thick minefields, and artfully positioned defenses. Winter rains and intemperate weather made the campaign more arduous. The Americans occupied Naples on 1 October. Despite devastation inflicted during the German withdrawal, American engineers had the port once again operating at capacity within a week. Meanwhile the British had secured the Foggia airfields. The offensive ground on in the face of horrific conditions and heavy casualties. The Allies fought major battles to force the Volturno River, close to the Sangro River, seize Ortona, and force passages through the Mignano Gap and in the vicinity of San Pietro. By 17 January they closed to the formidable Gustav Line, a German defensive belt running across Italy from the Gulf of Gaeta to the Adriatic Sea " and including the famous Monte Cassino.
206 | Event: Tehran Conference | Date: 1943-11-28 | Tag: conferences, wwii | Description: The Tehran Conference brought together - for the first time - President of the United States Franklin D. Roosevelt, Prime Minister Winston S. Churchill of the United Kingdom and General Secretary of the (Soviet) Communist Party Joseph Stalin to coordinate war measures. The western Allies committed to Operation OVERLORD, the invasion of France and liberation of Western Europe, to begin in the spring of 1944. This much anticipated "Second Front" - a term in deference to the Soviets" hard-fought "First Front" - would increase pressure on the Germans and correspondingly reduce pressure on the Soviets. The Soviets committed to join the war against Japan once Germany was defeated. Further agreements shifted the post-war western border of Poland to the Oder-Neisse Rivers, its eastern border to the vicinity of Bialystok and the Bug River, committed to aid the Yugoslav partisans, encouraged Turkey to enter the war and pledged support if it did so, proposed a United Nations organization, and agreed to further military staff deliberations. A separate protocol recognized the independence of Iran, then under Allied occupation, and pledged it economic assistance. The Tehran Conference guided Allied grand strategy for the rest of the war, and did much to shape the post-war era.
207 | Event: Bismarck Archipelago Campaign | Date: 1943-12-15 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: The Bismarck Archipelago, located northwest of the Solomon Islands chain and northeast of New Guinea, consists of New Britain, New Ireland, the Admiralties and a few smaller islands. The terrain is volcanic, climate hot and rainy, vegetation heavy jungle, and environment disease ridden. On northeast New Britain the Japanese had established a heavily defended base at Rabaul to support their drive into the South Pacific. Having blunted this drive in the Papua (23 July 1942 - 23 January 1943) and Guadalcanal (7 August 1942 - 21 February 1943) campaigns, the Allies resolved to reduce Rabaul and establish bases nearby for their own further advances. This operation was to be code named CARTWHEEL. The Japanese strongly fortified Rabaul and defended it with 100,000 troops positioned with numerous defensive advantages. Japanese Naval and air elements based at Rabaul had been severely attrited in earlier fighting. Rather than conducting a costly direct assault, the Allies resolved to seize less heavily defended surrounding islands, convert them into bases, isolate Rabaul, and ultimately destroy Japanese forces there after they had been severely weakened. On 15 December 1943 American soldiers stormed ashore at Arawe, and on 26 December American marines at Cape Gloucester, both located on the western end of New Britain. After fierce fighting the Americans wiped out Japanese resistance proximate to the landings, and established a continuous line across western New Britain by March 1944. In concert with Australian forces they pushed eastward along New Britain, avoiding heavy casualties but squeezing the Japanese into an ever smaller portion of the island. On 15 February the US Navy supported a landing by a reinforced brigade of New Zealanders and 1,500 Americans in the Green Islands, which were quickly converted into an Allied stronghold east of Rabaul. Meanwhile the seizure of western New Britain had secured the straits into the Bismarck Sea, and the American 1st Cavalry Division crossed the Bismarck Sea to land on Los Negros in the Admiralties. Repelling savage Japanese counterattacks, the cavalrymen went on to secure the islands. These featured a splendid harbor that soon became a major American base. On 20 March US Marines seized Emirau Island, northwest of Rabaul, and converted it into a base as well. Throughout the campaign the United States Navy neutralized forces at Kavieng and Rabaul with naval and air strikes. With relatively few casualties the Allies isolated and surrounded Rabaul, and positioned themselves for further offensives. In November 1944 the Americans terminated their operations in New Britain. The Australians completed the strangulation of Rabaul while the Americans pushed on to the Philippines.
208 | Event: Anzio Campaign | Date: 1944-01-22 | Tag: invasions, battles, wwii | Description: As the Naples-Foggia Campaign (18 August 1943 " 21 January 1944) ground to a halt, the Allies faced the formidable defenses of the Gustav Line, cutting across Italy from the Gulf of Gaeta to Pescara. The Allies resolved to outflank this line with an amphibious landing. They put more than two divisions ashore near Anzio on 22 January, and quickly reinforced these with two more. The landing was virtually unopposed at first, but the Germans quickly massed superior forces against it from elsewhere in Italy, France and the Balkans. By 29 January the Germans had assembled 71,500 troops to oppose 69,000 Allied soldiers. On 3 February the Germans launched a series of major counterattacks in a determined effort to push the Allies into the sea. The Allied line, ably supported by massive naval gunfire and aerial bombardment, held. Both sides raced to reinforce their embattled units. By mid-February about 100,000 Allies faced about 120,000 Germans along a 35 mile front surrounding Anzio. On 29 February the Germans launched another major offensive near Cisterna, but the American 3rd Infantry Division was prepared for it. Fighting from dug in positions with ample reserves and firing 66,000 artillery rounds in a single day, the Americans repulsed the attack with heavy losses. From that point the campaign settled into a stalemate for almost three months, with both sides dug in, roughly equivalent in manpower, and unable to dislodge each other. The Allies now had the strategic initiative, however, and continued to build up at Anzio and along the Gustav Line for further offensives. From January through June the Allies off loaded more than 530,000 tons of supplies through the Anzio Beachhead, and built up a force of over seven divisions. On 11 May the Allies launched a massive offensive into the Gustav Line, and on 23 May divisions attacked out of the Anzio beachhead to link up with it. Forces from the south linked up with those attacking from Anzio near Borgo Grappa on 25 May, thus ending Anzio as a separate campaign.
209 | Event: Rome-Arno Campaign | Date: 1944-01-22 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: As the Naples-Foggia Campaign (18 August 1943 " 21 January 1944) ground to a halt, the Allies faced the formidable defenses of the Gustav Line cutting across Italy from the Gulf of Gaeta to Pescara. The Allies resolved to outflank this line with an amphibious landing at Anzio while diverting German attention and reserves with preliminary attacks across the Garigliano and Rapido Rivers along the Gustav Line. The Rapido crossings were bloodily repulsed, but more than two divisions came ashore near Anzio virtually unopposed on 22 January. These were quickly reinforced by two more. See the Anzio Campaign (22 January " 24 May 1944). The Germans reacted to Anzio quickly, drawing divisions from northern Italy, France and the Balkans to counterattack the Allied beachhead. After fierce and costly fighting, with naval gunfire providing crucial support, Anzio stalemated in early March. Roughly equivalent forces dug in around the beachhead, and were unable to dislodge each other. Attempting to break through to Anzio and continue on to Rome via the Liri River Valley, the Allies mounted major attacks on Cassino and Monte Cassino in February and March. These were repulsed with heavy casualties. Reinforcing themselves and building up stockpiles in April, the Allies mounted a more massive assault " twenty-five divisions supported by over sixteen thousand artillery pieces - in May. Breaking through the Gustav Line in the vicinity of Monte Majo, the Allies pushed on to link up with the Anzio beachhead, overrun subsequent German defensive lines, and liberate Rome on 4 June. The Germans struggled to delay the Allied advance and escape encirclements, falling back on the formidable defenses of a "Gothic Line" they had constructed along the Apennines Mountains running from Spezia to Pesaro. After advancing almost three hundred miles, the Allied drive stalled as seven divisions were withdrawn for the invasion of southern France. Those remaining in Italy redeployed and reconstituted. See the Southern France Campaign (15 August to 14 September). Further Allied offensives pushed the Germans beyond Pisa, Florence and the Arno River. The Allies then paused before attempting a major breakthrough of the Gothic Line.
210 | Event: Eastern Mandates Campaign | Date: 1944-01-31 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: As the Central Pacific Campaign (7 December 1941 - 6 December 1943) concluded, the Americans had seized Makin and Tarawa in the Gilbert Islands and established valuable air and naval bases there. Having virtually destroyed Japanese air and severely damaged Japanese naval capabilities in the area, they continued their advance into the Eastern Mandates (also Marshall) Islands. The western islands of Wotje, Mille, Maloelap and Jaluit were heavily defended, so the Americans bypassed them and instead attacked Kwajalein and Roi-Namur in the center of the archipelago. After devastating bombardments from air, sea, and offshore islets upon which artillery had been hastily landed, on 1 February the 7th Infantry Division stormed ashore on Kwajalein and the 4th Marine Division on Roi-Namur. The dazed defenders fought back fiercely, but with little coordination. The Americans lost about 230 killed and the Japanese almost 8,500 in several days of fighting. Meanwhile Majuro Atoll, an ideal fleet anchorage, fell without resistance. Carrier air strikes against Truk, 700 miles west of the Eastern Mandates, on 17-18 February neutralized naval and air threats from that major Japanese base as the Americans moved into the western portions of the island chain. Marines secured Engebi on 18 February after a six hour battle. Resistance on Eniwetok proved fiercer, but that island fell to marines and soldiers on 21 February after four days of fighting. After an artillery, air and naval bombardment totaling almost 900 tons of munitions, Parry Island presented minor resistance and fell within a day. The Americans losses for Engebi, Eniwetok and Parry Islands totaled about 260 killed, whereas the Japanese lost over 2,600. Having seized the Eastern Mandates quickly and with minor losses, the Americans pushed on across the Central Pacific to the Marianas.
211 | Event: Normandy Campaign | Date: 1944-06-06 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: Allied victory in Europe required the destruction of Nazi Germany. Great Britain and the United States committed to an invasion through France, Operation OVERLORD, to cooperate with the Soviet Union in achieving that purpose. A massive Allied force of almost three million built up in the British Islands. Allied bombing and French Resistance attacks isolated the future battlefield, while elaborate security and deception plans focused German attention in the vicinity of the Pas-de-Calais. On the night of 5-6 June American and British paratroopers landed in Normandy to secure egress from the beachheads, disrupt German counterattacks, and guard the flanks of selected beaches. On the morning of 6 June, US Navy, US Coast Guard and Royal Navy amphibious craft landed six Allied divisions, massively supported by air and naval bombardment, on beaches code-named UTAH, OMAHA, GOLD, JUNO and SWORD. Difficult seas and weather interfered with the landings, as did staunch German resistance. The situation turned particularly desperate on OMAHA beach, where soldiers from the 1st and 29th Infantry Divisions clawed their way up bluffs dominating the shoreline in the face of withering fire. Naval fire support was often at point-blank range. By day"s end more than 100,000 Allied soldiers were ashore, and a foothold had been established. After further fierce fighting the Allies linked up the several beaches and pushed inland. Here they faced difficult bocage country, small fields broken up by centuries old hedgerows. These favored the defense. More open country existed around Caen, but here German armored units massed for counterattacks that heavily attrited both sides. The American VII Corps pushed across the Cotentin Peninsula to isolate Cherbourg by 18 June, and secured that city ten days later after savage fighting. The British continued their attacks on Caen, pushing beyond the city by 20 July and drawing in German mobile reserves. Meanwhile the American attack ground on through the bocage to secure St. Lo on 18 July. Here they reached ground suitable for mechanized warfare, and the massive build-up of units and supplies within the beachhead positioned them for a breakout offensive.
214 | Event: V-1 Flying Bomb Attacks | Date: 1944-06-13 | Tag: attacks, operations, wwii | Description: Hitler promised "miracle weapons" to reverse the tide of defeat besetting his forces. Of the weapons he had in mind, the most deadly proved to be the Vergeltungswaffe (Retaliation Weapon) 1, or V-1. The V-1 was a primitive cruise missile with a sheet steel body, plywood wings, pulse jet engine and 150 mile range. Its guidance system proved sufficiently accurate to hit large area targets, like London or Antwerp, without putting pilots at risk. The V-1 required a catapult launch or air drop to get started, and the Germans began such launches from France and the Low Countries on 13 June 1944. Allied defensive measures included barrage balloons, anti-aircraft guns, and fighter interception. Radar based automatic gun lay and the proximity fuse greatly increased the efficiency of antiaircraft guns, and Allied fighters perfected techniques for intercepting the missiles from high altitude. Launch sites came under heavy Allied bombardment. Overall 2,419 of 9,521 V-1s launched at England reached London. Over half of the remainder were shot down by Allied pilots and gunners. The V-1 threat to England dissipated as Allied advances over-ran launch sites and put the missiles out of range. Longer range versions came into play too late to much affect England, although the port of Antwerp remained subject to bombardment through March 1945.
215 | Event: V-1 Flying Bomb Attacks | Date: 1944-06-13 | Tag: attacks, operations, wwii | Description: Hitler promised "miracle weapons" to reverse the tide of defeat besetting his forces. Of the weapons he had in mind, the most deadly proved to be the Vergeltungswaffe (Retaliation Weapon) 1, or V-1. The V-1 was a primitive cruise missile with a sheet steel body, plywood wings, pulse jet engine and 150 mile range. Its guidance system proved sufficiently accurate to hit large area targets, like London or Antwerp, without putting pilots at risk. The V-1 required a catapult launch or air drop to get started, and the Germans began such launches from France and the Low Countries on 13 June 1944. Allied defensive measures included barrage balloons, anti-aircraft guns, and fighter interception. Radar based automatic gun lay and the proximity fuse greatly increased the efficiency of antiaircraft guns, and Allied fighters perfected techniques for intercepting the missiles from high altitude. Launch sites came under heavy Allied bombardment. Overall 2,419 of 9,521 V-1s launched at England reached London. Over half of the remainder were shot down by Allied pilots and gunners. The V-1 threat to England dissipated as Allied advances over-ran launch sites and put the missiles out of range. Longer range versions came into play too late to much affect England, although the port of Antwerp remained subject to bombardment through March 1945.
216 | Event: Western Pacific Campaign | Date: 1944-06-15 | Tag: battles, invasions, wwii | Description: Success in the Eastern Mandates Campaign (31 January " 14 June) brought American forces within striking distance of the Marianas Islands. On 15 June American marines, later joined by soldiers, landed on Saipan. They secured it after three weeks of savage fighting. Japanese defenders were well positioned in rocky, heavily vegetated volcanic terrain, and assault forces dug them out a cave or fighting position at a time. Meanwhile the Japanese fleet sortied against the American fleet supporting operations in the Marianas. It was heavily defeated in the Battle of the Philippine Sea on 19-20 June. This lop-sided American victory virtually destroyed Japanese carrier and naval aviation capabilities. On 24 July two Marine divisions supported by Army artillery, engineer and logistical units assaulted Tinian. After a nine day battle they secured this island and its superb airfields. On 21 July the Americans assaulted Guam, the largest of the Marianas and one that had been under prewar American jurisdiction. After three weeks of arduous fighting in difficult terrain, the Americans liberated the island. From the Marianas the Americans pushed on into the Palaus Islands, closest to the Philippines along the Central Pacific approach. After days of intense carrier-based air and naval bombardment, American marines assaulted Peleliu on 15 September and American soldiers Anguar on 17 September. Anguar fell in thirteen days, but the more heavily defended Peleliu proved to be some of the most difficult fighting in such a small space in the entire war. The Japanese dug elaborate cave complexes into rough, volcanic, heavily vegetated terrain, and fought back savagely. Losses mounted, and the Marines were reinforced by the Army"s 81st Infantry Division. Relying heavily on flamethrowers and bulldozers, and after weathering several typhoons, the Americans declared Peleliu secure on 27 November. Bases in the Marianas lay within B-29 bomber range of Japan.
217 | Event: China Defense Campaign | Date: 1944-06-22 | Tag: operations, invasions, wwii | Description: Following their great victory at Kursk (5-23 July 1943), the Soviets launched a series of major offensives. Massive attacks rolled back the Germans and liberated such strategic cities as Leningrad, Smolensk, Kiev and Odessa, but did not inflict truly decisive defeats. During the spring thaw of 1944 the Soviets built up forces for their greatest offensive yet, code-named Operation BAGRATION. It was timed to roughly coincide with Operation OVERLORD, the invasion of the western Allies through Normandy, and used an elaborate deception plan to convince the Germans the blow would land other than where it did. After preliminary guerrilla operations to disrupt communications, the Soviets launched their main attack towards Minsk on 23 June. Over a million men, four thousand tanks and five thousand aircraft attacked along a 350 mile front, supported by artillery concentrations of four hundred pieces per mile. The Germans were mal-positioned by Hitler"s insistence that they defend forward, and never recovered from initial breakthroughs in the face of improved Soviet mobility - in part facilitated by Lend-Lease trucks. In two weeks of savage fighting the Germans lost twenty five divisions and 300,000 men. The defeat was decisive, ejected the Germans from the pre-war Soviet Union, and propelled the Soviets into Poland and East Prussia before logistics brought them to a halt. Collateral campaigns in the aftermath of the breakthrough broke into the Balkans and the Baltic states.
218 | Event: Northern France Campaign | Date: 1944-07-25 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: Having established a lodgment, heavily attrited the Germans, and built up a force ashore of more than thirty-four divisions during the Normandy Campaign (6 June " 24 July 1944), the Allies were poised for a breakout offensive. On 25 July over 2,400 bombers and fighter bombers hammered German lines in the vicinity of St. Lo, and the strongly reinforced American VII Corps launched a major attack. After a few days of hard fighting the Americans broke through the pulverized defenders. Armored columns closely supported by fighter-bombers pushed through Coutances and on to Avranches, splitting the German lines and opening the gateway into Brittany. From Avranches a corps swept west into Brittany and ultimately seized Brest and other Breton ports, while the rest of General George S. Patton"s newly activated Third Army swept east through Le Mans and across the German rear. A counterattack by five panzer divisions through Mortain to cut off the advancing Americans was repulsed with heavy losses. On 19 August Americans attacking from the south linked up with Poles under British command attacking through Caen from the north, trapping many Germans in the "Falaise Pocket". Here the Allies captured 43,000 prisoners. Thousands of more Germans were killed in the fighting, or lost their equipment to Allied bombing and pursuit. The Americans pushed on to cross the Seine River on 19 August, and closed yet another encirclement of retreating Germans west of the Seine by capturing Elbeuf. On 25 August the French 2nd Armored Division rolled through liberated Paris amidst wildly cheering crowds. The Allies pushed on to the German border, demolishing enemy units en route and capturing another 25,000 Germans at Mons. The pace of their advance stretched supplies, particularly petroleum, to the limit. The Germans hastily manned the formidable "West Wall" defenses along their national border with new levies, units drawn from replacement and training formations, Air Force and Navy personnel, and remnants that had escaped from France. Hard fighting lay ahead as the Allies closed to the German border along a broad front.
219 | Event: Warsaw Uprising | Date: 1944-08-01 | Tag: battles, uprisings, wwii | Description: As Soviet forces approached within ten miles of the Polish capital in the aftermath of their successful Belorussian Offensive, the underground Polish Home Army rose to evict the Germans from occupied Warsaw. Such uprisings had facilitated the early liberation of other major cities, but this situation was complicated by the fact that the Polish Home Army was loyal to the Polish Government in Exile based in London, whereas the Soviets favored a Polish Committee of National Liberation of their own design. The Soviet offensive was logistically spent after advancing three hundred miles, and Soviet resources had been diverted to campaigns in the Balkans and along the Baltic. Meanwhile the Germans counterattacked vigorously along the Vistula, and were determined to hold Warsaw as a bastion in the east. German reinforcements poured into Warsaw. Fierce street fighting broke out between the Poles, who seized major fragments of the city initially, and the Germans attempting to reassert control. The Soviets did permit the 1st Polish Army serving with them to attempt crossings of the Vistula to relieve their embattled countrymen, but supported them ineffectively. The Soviets were generally uncooperative with attempts made by the western Allies to airdrop supplies into the city, arguing that far more such supplies fell into the hands of Germans than Poles. The momentarily resurgent Germans proved desperate, powerful and ruthless. They pushed the Soviets back in places, ground down Polish resistance in savage fighting, and inflicted horrific atrocities on Polish civilians. The Poles ultimately surrendered on terms that Home Army soldiers be treated in accordance with the Geneva Convention as prisoners of war, and that the civilian population be treated humanely. Ten weeks later Warsaw fell to a renewed offensive by the Soviets and the 1st Polish Army. The Soviets established a People"s Republic of Poland, and many members of the Polish Home Army liberated from prisoner of war camps and Polish soldiers fighting alongside the western Allies remained in the West.
220 | Event: Southern France Campaign | Date: 1944-08-15 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: Since 1943 the western Allies had planned an invasion of Southern France to complement and support the Normandy Campaign (6 June " 24 July 1944) and the Northern France Campaign (25 July " 14 September). Drawing troops from the Rome-Arno Campaign (22 January " 9 September 1944) and French North Africa, a Franco-American Army landed in the Riviera beginning 15 August. Objectives were to capture Marseilles, Toulon and other ports, destroy German forces south of the Loire River, and link up with Allied forces in Northern France for the drive into Germany. The American VI Corps landed successfully and attacked aggressively. Within a week it overwhelmed resistance within the lodgment area and pushed on to Montelimar, threatening German withdrawal routes up the Rhone River. Meanwhile French divisions encircled and attacked Marseilles and Toulon, both of which fell on 28 August. The Germans suffered heavy losses retreating through gauntlets of fire or when their delay positions were successively overwhelmed by pursuing forces. By 3 September Lyon was behind Allied lines, and on 11 September Allied forces from Northern France and Southern France linked up at Sombernon. Of 250,000 Germans participating in the campaign, over half were killed, wounded, captured or missing. Allied losses were about 10,000. The Allies advanced so quickly that logistics proved to be their principal impediment, particularly with respect to fuel supplies. This situation eased as Marseilles and Toulon came on line as ports, and damaged railroads were restored and put back into use. Ultimately one third of the supplies supporting Allied Forces operating in Northern France would come through Southern French ports.
221 | Event: V-2 Rocket Attacks | Date: 1944-09-08 | Tag: attacks, operations, wwii | Description: Hitler promised "miracle weapons" to reverse the tide of defeat besetting his forces. Of the weapons he had in mind, the most historically significant was probably the Vergeltungswaffe (Retaliation Weapon) 2, or V-2. The V-2 was the first ballistic missile, and the first human device to achieve sub-orbital space flight. It was fueled by a mix of liquid oxygen, ethanol and water, and carried a 2,200 pound warhead 200 miles. Given the threat of Allied air bombardment, the Germans took to launching from mobile concealed platforms rather than from fixed sites. Because of its high trajectory and terminal speed, the V-2 was virtually invulnerable to contemporary means of interception when in flight, and its mobile launch platforms made it difficult to target on the ground. Allied ground advances eventually pushed potential V-2 launch sites out of range of targets in England. The first V-2 attacks hit London and Paris on 8 September 1944. The Germans launched almost 3,200 V-2s during World War II, fifty-one percent against Antwerp and forty-four percent against London. The V-2 was expensive to produce and deployed late in the war, so it had little effect on the war"s outcome. It was, however, a critical breakthrough in the approach to space travel and the Space Age.
222 | Event: V-2 Rocket Attacks
224 | | Date: 1944-09-08 | Tag: attacks, wwii | Description: Hitler promised "miracle weapons" to reverse the tide of defeat besetting his forces. Of the weapons he had in mind, the most historically significant was probably the Vergeltungswaffe (Retaliation Weapon) 2, or V-2. The V-2 was the first ballistic missile, and the first human device to achieve sub-orbital space flight. It was fueled by a mix of liquid oxygen, ethanol and water, and carried a 2,200 pound warhead 200 miles. Given the threat of Allied air bombardment, the Germans took to launching from mobile concealed platforms rather than from fixed sites. Because of its high trajectory and terminal speed, the V-2 was virtually invulnerable to contemporary means of interception when in flight, and its mobile launch platforms made it difficult to target on the ground. Allied ground advances eventually pushed potential V-2 launch sites out of range of targets in England. The first V-2 attacks hit London and Paris on 8 September 1944. The Germans launched almost 3,200 V-2s during World War II, fifty-one percent against Antwerp and forty-four percent against London. The V-2 was expensive to produce and deployed late in the war, so it had little effect on the war"s outcome. It was, however, a critical breakthrough in the approach to space travel and the Space Age.
227 | Event: North Apennines Campaign | Date: 1944-09-10 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: The Rome-Arno Campaign (22 January " 9 September 1944) left the Allies in Italy poised along the Arno River in the west and the Metauro River in the east. They were depleted by the withdrawal of seven divisions to fight in the Southern France Campaign (15 August " 14 September). Allied forces in Italy now included six American, two Canadian, eleven Commonwealth and two Polish divisions. The Allies resolved to shift their main attack from west to east to penetrate less heavily defended sectors of the German"s formidable Gothic Line. Secretly redeploying units across Italy from 15 through 23 August, they broke through the outer crust of the Gothic Line, forced intervening rivers running into the Adriatic Sea, and seized Rimini by 25 September. Meanwhile a largely American offensive drove north from Florence, outflanked and then seized the Futa Pass, and pushed within twenty miles of the vital rail hub of Bologna. Further offensives on both these axes ground forward through difficult terrain, but at a heavy cost in casualties. The Germans counterattacked fiercely, but were repeatedly beaten back. On 27 October the Allies halted these twin offensives. The priority given the fighting in France deprived them of critical supplies, munitions and replacements needed to push on in the face of determined resistance, rugged terrain, and deteriorating winter weather. In December the Allies seized Ravenna in the east and pushed on to the Senio River with a limited attack. In the west they repulsed a German spoiling attack up the Serchio River valley. In January five veteran Commonwealth divisions were withdrawn for operations in Western Europe and Greece. The forces that remained refurbished themselves over the winter, and were reinforced by new Italian units, a Brazilian division, and several separate brigades. In March limited attacks seized further key terrain, and positioned the Allies for a spring breakout into the Po River Valley.
228 | Event: North Apennines Campaign | Date: 1944-09-10 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: The Rome-Arno Campaign (22 January " 9 September 1944) left the Allies in Italy poised along the Arno River in the west and the Metauro River in the east. They were depleted by the withdrawal of seven divisions to fight in the Southern France Campaign (15 August " 14 September). Allied forces in Italy now included six American, two Canadian, eleven Commonwealth and two Polish divisions. The Allies resolved to shift their main attack from west to east to penetrate less heavily defended sectors of the German"s formidable Gothic Line. Secretly redeploying units across Italy from 15 through 23 August, they broke through the outer crust of the Gothic Line, forced intervening rivers running into the Adriatic Sea, and seized Rimini by 25 September. Meanwhile a largely American offensive drove north from Florence, outflanked and then seized the Futa Pass, and pushed within twenty miles of the vital rail hub of Bologna. Further offensives on both these axes ground forward through difficult terrain, but at a heavy cost in casualties. The Germans counterattacked fiercely, but were repeatedly beaten back. On 27 October the Allies halted these twin offensives. The priority given the fighting in France deprived them of critical supplies, munitions and replacements needed to push on in the face of determined resistance, rugged terrain, and deteriorating winter weather. In December the Allies seized Ravenna in the east and pushed on to the Senio River with a limited attack. In the west they repulsed a German spoiling attack up the Serchio River valley. In January five veteran Commonwealth divisions were withdrawn for operations in Western Europe and Greece. The forces that remained refurbished themselves over the winter, and were reinforced by new Italian units, a Brazilian division, and several separate brigades. In March limited attacks seized further key terrain, and positioned the Allies for a spring breakout into the Po River Valley.
229 | Event: Rhineland Campaign | Date: 1944-09-15 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: On 11 September Allied troops fighting the Northern France Campaign (25 July " 14 September) linked up with those fighting the Southern France Campaign (15 August " 14 September) at Sombernon. Supreme Allied Commander General Dwight D. Eisenhower continued the advance on a broad front in recognition of logistical realities, to allow the Germans no respite anywhere, and to preserve the option of shifting priority from one axis to another as circumstances arose. In September the Allies launched airborne attacks to seize a sixty-four mile string of bridges through the Netherlands and across the Rhine (Operation MARKET), and sought to link them up with an armor thrust to establish a Rhine bridgehead (Operation GARDEN). German counterattacks overwhelmed paratroopers at the furthest bridge, Arnhem, before the relieving armor could reach them, stopping the Allies short of the Rhine. In October American forces penetrated formidable West Wall defenses and secured Aachen after savage house-to-house fighting. In November Commonwealth forces secured maritime approaches to the port of Antwerp, Americans fought savage battles to close to the Roer River, secure the Hurtgen Forest, seize Metz, and close to the West Wall, and French forces liberated Strasbourg and Mulhouse. This grinding advance was temporarily interrupted by the Ardennes-Alsace Campaign (16 December 1944 " 25 January 1945). In January 1945 British forces reached the Roer River after clearing the so-called Roermond Triangle, the Americans contained a German offensive into Alsace, and Franco-American forces demolished the Colmar Pocket and closed to the Rhine in the south. In February and early March the Allies closed to the Rhine north of the Moselle River after hard fighting. On 7 March the American 9th Armored Division seized a bridge across the Rhine at Remagen in a daring rush. The Americans beat back German counterattacks against the bridgehead, and then expanded it. Meanwhile a converging offensive by the American Third and Seventh Armies crushed German forces remaining west of the Rhine and south of the Moselle. By 21 March the Allies had closed to the Rhine along its entire length and were poised to continue the attack. The Germans had suffered catastrophic losses defending west of that river.
230 | Event: Rhineland Campaign | Date: 1944-09-15 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: On 11 September Allied troops fighting the Northern France Campaign (25 July " 14 September) linked up with those fighting the Southern France Campaign (15 August " 14 September) at Sombernon. Supreme Allied Commander General Dwight D. Eisenhower continued the advance on a broad front in recognition of logistical realities, to allow the Germans no respite anywhere, and to preserve the option of shifting priority from one axis to another as circumstances arose. In September the Allies launched airborne attacks to seize a sixty-four mile string of bridges through the Netherlands and across the Rhine (Operation MARKET), and sought to link them up with an armor thrust to establish a Rhine bridgehead (Operation GARDEN). German counterattacks overwhelmed paratroopers at the furthest bridge, Arnhem, before the relieving armor could reach them, stopping the Allies short of the Rhine. In October American forces penetrated formidable West Wall defenses and secured Aachen after savage house-to-house fighting. In November Commonwealth forces secured maritime approaches to the port of Antwerp, Americans fought savage battles to close to the Roer River, secure the Hurtgen Forest, seize Metz, and close to the West Wall, and French forces liberated Strasbourg and Mulhouse. This grinding advance was temporarily interrupted by the Ardennes-Alsace Campaign (16 December 1944 " 25 January 1945). In January 1945 British forces reached the Roer River after clearing the so-called Roermond Triangle, the Americans contained a German offensive into Alsace, and Franco-American forces demolished the Colmar Pocket and closed to the Rhine in the south. In February and early March the Allies closed to the Rhine north of the Moselle River after hard fighting. On 7 March the American 9th Armored Division seized a bridge across the Rhine at Remagen in a daring rush. The Americans beat back German counterattacks against the bridgehead, and then expanded it. Meanwhile a converging offensive by the American Third and Seventh Armies crushed German forces remaining west of the Rhine and south of the Moselle. By 21 March the Allies had closed to the Rhine along its entire length and were poised to continue the attack. The Germans had suffered catastrophic losses defending west of that river.
231 | Event: Leyte Campaign | Date: 1944-10-17 | Tag: invasions, battles, wwii | Description: Successes in the Bismarck Archipelago Campaign (15 December 1943 " 27 November 1944) and Western Pacific Campaign (15 June 1944 " 2 September 1945) put American air, naval and amphibious forces within striking distance of the Philippine Islands. Bases in the Philippines would threaten Japan"s maritime communications to the oil-rich East Indies, advance toward both China and Japan, and facilitate the liberation of an American ally. Leyte was chosen as the first objective within the Philippines because of its central location, ample eastward facing beaches and less robust defenses. On 17 October Army Rangers seized islands on the approaches to Leyte to destroy Japanese installations that could provide early warning or interfere with the landings. The Japanese on Suluan Island did get out a message that prompted the Japanese to order Operation SHO-1 for the defense of the Philippines and decisive battle. On 20 October four divisions stormed ashore on Leyte, supported by the fast carriers and battleships of the US Third Fleet and the older battleships and escort carriers of the US Seventh Fleet. Within a few days they secured the northwest of the island and advanced to a line described by Carigara, Dagami and Burauen. Resistance was fierce in places, but uncoordinated. Rough terrain and thick jungle aided the defenders where the fighting proved toughest. Meanwhile the Japanese decided to heavily reinforce ground forces on Leyte, and to eliminate the supporting American Seventh Fleet with an ambitious three-prong naval attack. The prong advancing through the San Bernardino Strait and around Samar surprised the supporting escort carriers of the Seventh Fleet and put American amphibious shipping supporting the landings at great risk. However, it retired in the face of heroic resistance by planes from the escort carriers and supporting surface escorts. Surface forces routed the prong advancing through the Surigao Strait. American carrier planes defeated the Japanese off Cape Engano. The Battle for Leyte Gulf, a succession of distinct fleet engagements, further crippled the Japanese Navy. It effectively ended their capacity to interfere in the Philippines. On the ground the Americans continued to advance. By 7 November they had captured Carigara, Dagami and Buraen, crossed the mountainous spine of the island, and poised for drives on Limon from the north and Ormoc from the south. These converging attacks pushed towards each other against fierce resistance in tough terrain. On 7 December the American 77th Infantry Division landed amphibiously behind Japanese lines near Ormoc, and unhinged Japanese defenses on that axis. Meanwhile newly reinforced Americans seized "Breakneck Ridge" south of Limon after savage fighting, and pushed south. On 20 December the two attacks linked up at Libungao, and effective resistance collapsed. Mopping up the island took several months more. The Japanese invested heavily and lost heavily in the Leyte Campaign. Their naval and air forces never recovered, and they could ill afford the 49,000 soldiers they lost to inflict 15,000 casualties on the Americans.
232 | Event: Leyte Campaign | Date: 1944-10-17 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: Successes in the Bismarck Archipelago Campaign (15 December 1943 " 27 November 1944) and Western Pacific Campaign (15 June 1944 " 2 September 1945) put American air, naval and amphibious forces within striking distance of the Philippine Islands. Bases in the Philippines would threaten Japan"s maritime communications to the oil-rich East Indies, advance toward both China and Japan, and facilitate the liberation of an American ally. Leyte was chosen as the first objective within the Philippines because of its central location, ample eastward facing beaches and less robust defenses. On 17 October Army Rangers seized islands on the approaches to Leyte to destroy Japanese installations that could provide early warning or interfere with the landings. The Japanese on Suluan Island did get out a message that prompted the Japanese to order Operation SHO-1 for the defense of the Philippines and decisive battle. On 20 October four divisions stormed ashore on Leyte, supported by the fast carriers and battleships of the US Third Fleet and the older battleships and escort carriers of the US Seventh Fleet. Within a few days they secured the northwest of the island and advanced to a line described by Carigara, Dagami and Burauen. Resistance was fierce in places, but uncoordinated. Rough terrain and thick jungle aided the defenders where the fighting proved toughest. Meanwhile the Japanese decided to heavily reinforce ground forces on Leyte, and to eliminate the supporting American Seventh Fleet with an ambitious three-prong naval attack. The prong advancing through the San Bernardino Strait and around Samar surprised the supporting escort carriers of the Seventh Fleet and put American amphibious shipping supporting the landings at great risk. However, it retired in the face of heroic resistance by planes from the escort carriers and supporting surface escorts. Surface forces routed the prong advancing through the Surigao Strait. American carrier planes defeated the Japanese off Cape Engano. The Battle for Leyte Gulf, a succession of distinct fleet engagements, further crippled the Japanese Navy. It effectively ended their capacity to interfere in the Philippines. On the ground the Americans continued to advance. By 7 November they had captured Carigara, Dagami and Buraen, crossed the mountainous spine of the island, and poised for drives on Limon from the north and Ormoc from the south. These converging attacks pushed towards each other against fierce resistance in tough terrain. On 7 December the American 77th Infantry Division landed amphibiously behind Japanese lines near Ormoc, and unhinged Japanese defenses on that axis. Meanwhile newly reinforced Americans seized "Breakneck Ridge" south of Limon after savage fighting, and pushed south. On 20 December the two attacks linked up at Libungao, and effective resistance collapsed. Mopping up the island took several months more. The Japanese invested heavily and lost heavily in the Leyte Campaign. Their naval and air forces never recovered, and they could ill afford the 49,000 soldiers they lost to inflict 15,000 casualties on the Americans.
233 | Event: Luzon Campaign | Date: 1944-12-15 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: Having established a foothold in the Philippines during the Leyte Campaign (17 October 1944 " 1 July 1945), American forces moved on to liberate Luzon. Bases on Luzon would virtually sever Japan"s maritime communications to the oil-rich East Indies, put China and the Japanese home islands within strategic reach, and facilitate the liberation of an American ally. The Japanese did not believe they could hold the island outright, and resolved to fight delaying actions into mountainous northeast Luzon, the mountains west of Clark Field, and mountains east of Manila. They hoped to inflict heavy casualties, delay the invasion of Japan, and perhaps achieve a diplomatic end to the war. On 15 December the Americans landed on the nearby island of Mindoro against light resistance, and quickly put in airfields to support operations on Luzon. On 9 January 1945 the Americans landed four divisions abreast in Lingayen Gulf, and attacked down Luzon"s relatively open central valley. Here terrain favored the mechanized forces they had great advantages with respect to, and they swept the Japanese before them. Throughout the campaign the Americans received invaluable assistance from Filipino guerrillas, both in active operations and in gathering intelligence. Naval forces supporting landings were subjected to intensifying kamikaze attacks. American soldiers seized Clark Field after determined resistance, and entered Manila on 4 February. After a month of savage house to house fighting, they finally secured the Philippine capital. Meanwhile the Americans had cleared the Zambales Mountains and Bataan after fierce resistance, and seized the fortress island of Corregidor with a daring amphibious and airborne assault. The Americans pushed on from Manila to secure the mountains to the east, which contained the city"s vital reservoirs. This offensive ground on through rugged terrain and determined resistance, clearing southern Luzon by 31 May. American forces attacking into northeast Luzon made continued progress, but here the Japanese took advantage of larger numbers, rough terrain and fortified belts to hold out until hostilities ended on 15 August. The Japanese Army lost 215,000 troops, to include 9,000 captured, during the campaign, whereas the Americans suffered 10,380 killed and 36,550 wounded. The Japanese had delayed well enough to preserve a force in being throughout the campaign, but the speedy seizures of Clark Field and the Manila Bay did not allow them to much delay American strategic progress through the Pacific.
234 | Event: Ardennes-Alsace Campaign | Date: 1944-12-16 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: While the Allies closed to the German border in the prolonged Rhineland Campaign (15 September 1944 " 21 March 1945), the Germans attempted to regain the initiative with a surprise offensive through the Ardennes to seize the vital port of Antwerp. Perhaps a third of the Allied forces in the west could thus be cut off and destroyed, Allied logistics would be dealt a crippling blow, and German mobile forces could then be shifted east quickly enough to thwart an anticipated Soviet spring offensive. The German attack, beginning during overcast weather on 16 December, penetrated through the Losheim Gap, trapped two infantry regiments on the Schnee Eifel, and pushed on towards the vital road junction of Bastogne. Determined American resistance north and south of this narrow corridor greatly delayed German advances, and confined them to restricted road networks in difficult terrain. Particularly noteworthy in this regard were the defense of Elsenborn Ridge, a five day delaying action at St.Vith, and holding the southern shoulder near Echternach. The Americans hastily deployed the 101st Airborne Division into Bastogne, and built a defense of that town around it. The Germans bypassed newly reinforced Bastogne with their armor spearheads, and left the reduction of the surrounded town to trailing infantry divisions. This further complicated their difficult logistical situation, as did Allied bombing following a break in the weather on 23 December. To the north of the emerging "Bulge" the Americans gave ground grudgingly while gathering resources for a counterattack. To the south the Americans launched a major counterattack on 22 December, linking up with the besieged defenders of Bastogne on 26 December. Predictably, leading German armor units ran low on fuel, and several were defeated by American attacks or abandoned their equipment altogether. The Americans, now heavily reinforced, initiated a massive converging counter-offensive from both north and south on 3 January 1945. This faced fierce fighting in tough terrain as the Germans fought to hold some portion of their gains and to extricate their armor from an emerging trap. Noting American mass in the Ardennes and a thinning of American lines elsewhere, the Germans launched an offensive in Alsace on 31 December. The Americans had anticipated such an attack. They developed plans layering defensive lines and kill zones, and permitting limited withdrawals as necessary. The Germans exhausted themselves in a series of attacks that made inconsequential gains, and abandoned the effort after a failed attack on Haguenau on 25-26 January 1945. By that date the American counter-offensive in the Ardennes had driven the Germans back to their original positions. German losses during these failed offensives into the Ardennes and Alsace are estimated at 125,000. Allied casualties were slightly lower. German mobile forces were severely depleted, and unavailable to face renewed Allied offensives.
235 | Event: Battle of Budapest | Date: 1944-12-26 | Tag: battles, attacks, wwii | Description: Temporarily pausing north of the Carpathian Mountains in the aftermath of the successful Belorussian Offensive, the Soviets attacked south of the Carpathians and encircled Budapest by 26 December. The Germans and allied Hungarians had converted Budapest into a fortified bastion along the Danube approaches into Germany, and determined to defend it to the final extremity. The Soviet siege ground on with overwhelming artillery bombardments, costly ground assaults and savage house to house fighting. The Germans launched several major attacks to relieve the city, but each of these was beaten back by more numerous Soviet forces. The Soviets closed to the east bank of the Danube by 18 January 1945, and finally overwhelmed the remainder of the city by 13 February. The Soviets lost 80,000 dead and 240,000 wounded or otherwise incapacitated; the Germans and Hungarians lost up to 150,000 military dead, wounded and captured, plus 40,000 civilians. The Soviet attack up the Danube continued.
236 | Event: Battle of Budapest | Date: 1944-12-26 | Tag: battles, attacks, wwii | Description: Temporarily pausing north of the Carpathian Mountains in the aftermath of the successful Belorussian Offensive, the Soviets attacked south of the Carpathians and encircled Budapest by 26 December. The Germans and allied Hungarians had converted Budapest into a fortified bastion along the Danube approaches into Germany, and determined to defend it to the final extremity. The Soviet siege ground on with overwhelming artillery bombardments, costly ground assaults and savage house to house fighting. The Germans launched several major attacks to relieve the city, but each of these was beaten back by more numerous Soviet forces. The Soviets closed to the east bank of the Danube by 18 January 1945, and finally overwhelmed the remainder of the city by 13 February. The Soviets lost 80,000 dead and 240,000 wounded or otherwise incapacitated; the Germans and Hungarians lost up to 150,000 military dead, wounded and captured, plus 40,000 civilians. The Soviet attack up the Danube continued.
237 | Event: Central Burma Campaign | Date: 1945-01-29 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: The prolonged India-Burma Campaign (2 April 1942 - 28 January 1945) left the Allies in possession of the rugged terrain of northern Burma, and of a tenuous land route through it to Kunming in China. Major Allied forces in Burma included the British-led Fourteenth Army and detached XV Corps, the Sino-American Northern Combat Area Command, and the Chinese Expeditionary Force. These were considerably assisted by local guerrillas operating behind enemy lines, such as 10,000 Kachin tribesmen raised as allies by Office of Strategic Services (OSS) Detachment 101. Aided by the Northern Combat Area Command, the Chinese Expeditionary Force liberated Lashio on 7 March and pushed south into the Shan Plateau. This greatly improved the security of overland communications with China. Meanwhile the XV Corps conducted a series of amphibious landings along the Bay of Bengal, seizing airfields from which to support the Fourteenth Army operating on the other side of the Arakan Mountains. The Fourteenth Army conducted the main attack down the Irrawaddy River valley, outflanking and then capturing Mandalay in masterful maneuvers. The Allies swept south, breaking up successive Japanese attempts to establish coherent lines. Rangoon fell to a XV Corps amphibious assault on 2 May just as British led columns were closing in from the north " and just before the monsoon season arrived to delay operations. Air supply made extraordinary contributions to the campaign, given vast distances and difficult terrain. Sino-American forces, for example, were reinforced with 75,000 troops and 100,000 tons of supplies flown in through remote Myitkyina over a five month period. In part because of aviation, Allied medical support proved far better than that of the Japanese. This made a huge difference with respect to saving wounded and injured, and also with respect to losses to diseases to which the region was prone. By May the Japanese Army in Burma was largely combat ineffective, and cut into isolated pieces holding out in the mountains.
238 | Event: Yalta Conference | Date: 1945-02-04 | Tag: conferences, wwii | Description: The Yalta Conference brought together Prime Minister Winston S. Churchill of the United Kingdom, President Franklin D. Roosevelt of the United States and General Secretary of the Communist Party Joseph Stalin of the Soviet Union to discuss the postwar settlement of Europe and the war against Japan. Stalin agreed to enter the war against Japan within ninety days of ending the war in Europe. Germany would be forced to surrender unconditionally, demilitarize, de-nazify, and split into American, British, French and Soviet occupation zones. A reparation council would be located in Russia, and German reparations would include the forced labor of captive soldiers. Poland"s borders would shift west, with the Soviets retaining the Curzon Line they had seized in 1939 and Poland"s western border moving to the Oder River. The Allies committed to free elections in liberated countries, although Stalin later reneged in those his armies occupied. Nazi war criminals were to be brought to justice, and citizens of the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia repatriated to their home countries with or without their consent. The Soviet Union would join the United Nations. The Yalta Conference did maintain Allied solidarity in the final campaigns against Germany and Japan, but also legitimated spheres of influence that later hardened into the Cold War.
239 | Event: Iwo Jima | Date: 1945-02-15 | Tag: battles, invasions, wwii | Description: Success in the Western Pacific Campaign (15 June 1944 - 2 September 1945) brought the Americans within B-29 bomber range of Japan. However, Japanese ground stations on Iwo Jima could identify B-29s en route to Japan from the Marianas and Japanese planes based there could intercept them. Capturing Iwo Jima would negate this risk, allow American fighters based there to escort bombers into Japan, and provide a way station for rescuing stricken bombers returning from Japan. The Japanese recognized the strategic significance of Iwo Jima, and reinforced its garrison to 23,000 carefully dug into fighting positions, bunkers, caves and connecting tunnels. Seventy-four days of air and three days of naval bombardment did little to diminish their combat effectiveness. On 19 February two U.S. Marine divisions, soon reinforced by a third, stormed ashore. Navy and Coast Guard vessels braved recurrent kamikaze attacks to land and sustain them. Fighting was savage as the Marines picked their way forward position by position. Grenades, demolitions and flamethrowers proved as important as bombardment and direct fire weapons in close quarters fighting. The treeless volcanic island provided little cover and poor traction, and was difficult to dig into for hasty positions. Despite these difficulties and heavy casualties, the Marines cut the island in two on the first day and secured dominant Mt. Suribachi - site of the iconic flag raising - by 23 February. Three more weeks of arduous battle extinguished organized resistance, and mopping up continued after that. All but about 1,000 of the defenders died in the fighting. The Americans suffered 24,891 casualties, of whom 6,821 were killed.
240 | Event: Southern Philippines Campaign | Date: 1945-02-27 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: With the Leyte Campaign (17 October 1944 " 1 July 1945) all but concluded and the Luzon Campaign (15 December 1944 - 4 July 1945) well under way, General Douglas MacArthur expanded operations to the general liberation of the Philippines. One incentive was to free the Filipinos from Japanese rule as quickly as possible. Another was to secure bases better positioned to cut Japanese communications with the East Indies and to support an Allied invasion of oil-rich Borneo. On 28 February 1945 an American regimental combat team landed near Puerta Princessa on Palawan and drove inland. The Japanese put up a fierce fight in the mountainous jungle interior, but were quickly defeated and then relentlessly hunted down by American patrols and Filipino guerrillas. Meanwhile two regimental combat teams landed near Zamboanga City on Mindanao on 10 March. This assault was greatly assisted by air support flying from a nearby airstrip seized by Filipino guerrillas several days earlier. The Japanese put up determined resistance after retreating to heavily fortified jungle positions, but were overwhelmed by American firepower and retreated in disorder up the Zamboanga Peninsula. Americans invaded the Sulu Archipelago at about this time, and quickly secured the most important islands. Significant resistance occurred only on Jolo, and it was crushed. The Visayan Islands were next, including the important ports of Iloilo and Cebu City. Between 18 March and 4 June American regimental combat teams assisted by Filipino guerrillas overran Panay, Negros, Cebu and Bohol islands. In each case the Japanese did not contest the landings, but instead fought in urban areas or in the jungle interior. They were heavily defeated, but nevertheless survived in pockets until the end of the war. On 17 April the Americans, greatly assisted by Filipino guerrillas, invaded southwestern Mindanao at Illana Bay. This was on the opposite side of the island from the Japanese main defenses around Davao. Exploiting a fleet of river boats and advancing quickly, the Americans came in behind the Japanese defenses and unhinged them. American advances and subsequent landings drove the Japanese into the jungle, where heavy fighting in difficult terrain ensued. The grinding jungle battle on Mindanao cost the American 820 killed and 2,880 wounded, whereas the Japanese lost 10,000 killed and 8,000 to starvation and disease. Another 22,000 Japanese fled into Mindanao"s interior, where they remained until the war ended. Mopping up required considerable effort, as did Southern Philippines naval mine sweeping to open safe passages among the islands.
241 | Event: Central Europe Campaign | Date: 1945-03-22 | Tag: invasions, wwii | Description: Having inflicted heavy losses on the Germans in the Rhineland Campaign (15 September 1944 - 21 March 1945), the western Allies closed to the Rhine River. They now deployed over four and a half million troops organized in more than ninety divisions against less capable German forces of perhaps a third their number. On 22 March the Americans launched a surprise crossing of the Rhine near Oppenheim. US Navy landing craft units ferried most troops across. This was followed shortly by crossings near Boppard, St. Goar and Worms, and by attacks out of the already existing Remagen bridgehead. Beginning 23 March British and American divisions supported by massive artillery strikes, waves of bombers and airborne landings forced the Rhine near Rees, Xanten and Wesel as well. Although resistance was fierce in places, Anglo-American forces attacking north of the Ruhr industrial heartland and American forces attacking south of it punched through to link up at Lippstedt on 1 April, trapping almost 400,000 Germans in the Ruhr Pocket. Converging attacks crushed the Ruhr Pocket by 18 April, leading to the largest single mass surrender of German troops thus far in the war. Meanwhile other Allied armies attacked on broad frontages to secure an arc described by Pforzheim, Nuremburg, Hof, Leipzig, the Elbe River and the outskirts of Bremen. Some advocated driving on to Berlin, but General Dwight D. Eisenhower recognized that the Soviets were more proximate and that Berlin lay well within territory ceded to Soviet control at the Yalta Conference. Instead he directed his forces to drive north to secure Hamburg and northwestern Germany, and south to preclude the Nazis from establishing an Alpine "National Redoubt" for a fanatical last stand. At 11:30 AM on 25 April a patrol from the 69th Infantry Division met a lone Russian horseman from the First Ukrainian Front near the village of Leckwitz, and a formal linkup with Soviets occurred at Torgau the following day. Germany had been split in two. Driving south, the Americans crossed the Danube on 22 April, punched into Czechoslovakia and Austria, seized Salzburg, and linked up with the American Fifth Army advancing north from Italy through the Brenner Pass on 4 May. Driving north, the British secured Bremen, Hamburg, Lubeck and Wismar by 2 May. Besieged by the Soviets in Berlin, Hitler committed suicide on 30 April. His successor, Admiral Karl Donitz, surrendered on 7 May. Although much needed to be done to process prisoners of war, repatriate refugees and slave laborers, re-establish sovereignty in newly liberated Nazi-occupied nations, and establish effective governance in Germany itself, the war in Europe was over.
242 | Event: Ryukyus Campaign | Date: 1945-03-26 | Tag: battles, invasions, wwii | Description: American successes in the Luzon Campaign (15 December 1944 - 4 July 1945) and on Iwo Jima (15 February " 16 March 1945) brought American forces ever closer to Japan. As a next step American planners determined to seize Okinawa, the largest and most important of the Ryukyu Islands. Here medium bombers and their escorts would be comfortably in range of Japan"s southern islands, and ample anchorage existed to support forces staging for the invasion of Japan itself. The Japanese were mindful of Okinawa"s critical importance, and committed over 110,000 soldiers to a determined defense in heavily fortified positions. They also resolved to unleash kamikaze suicide planes against the American fleet supporting operations on Okinawa, well within range of a one-way flight from Japan. On 26 March the Americans assaulted the Kerama Islands, and on 31 March Keise Shima. The first provided a seaplane base and an anchorage proximate to Okinawa, and the second positions for artillery within range of the fighting. On 1 April two reinforced Army and two reinforced Marine divisions attacked across the Hagushi beaches on the western shore of Okinawa. The landing were virtually unopposed, as the Japanese avoided the overwhelming air and naval bombardment of the beaches and held out in strong positions built into rough terrain, primarily around the ancient capital of Shuri. Within a few days time the Americans split the island in two. A Marine division turned north and, after significant fighting against uneven resistance, effectively secured the northern portion of Okinawa on 19 April. Meanwhile an Army division landed on the island of Ie Shima and secured its valuable airfield on 21 April after heavy fighting. The attack towards Shuri and on into southern Okinawa progressed slowly against a determined enemy in well organized defensive belts. Meanwhile waves of kamikazes and other attacks struck the American fleet. By campaign"s end the Americans suffered 36 ships sunk and 368 damaged, whereas the Japanese lost 7,830 aircraft. On 4 May the Japanese launched a major counterattack, which was crushed by overwhelming American firepower. In particular the Japanese artillery exposed itself to provide sustained fire support, and was virtually destroyed by counter-fire. On 7 May the capture of the Maeda Escarpment cracked Japanese outer defenses, but the campaign ground on position by position in bloody small unit actions. "Blowtorch and corkscrew" operations with flame throwers and demolition teams advanced foot by foot. Heavy rains in the latter half of May complicated operations. The Americans nevertheless declared Okinawa secure by 21 June. The Americans had suffered over 62,000 casualties, including 12,520 killed or missing and 36,361 wounded. The Japanese lost about 100,000 killed and 7,400 captured. In addition, at least 42,000 Okinawa civilians died in the campaign.
243 | Event: Po Valley Campaign | Date: 1945-04-05 | Tag: battles, operations, wwii | Description: The North Apennines Campaign (10 September " 4 April 1945) ground to a winter stalemate with both sides exhausted by heavy losses, and was further sapped by higher priorities given to other theaters for supplies and reinforcements. For two months combat was minimal while units reconstituted and built up for a spring offensive. The Axis deployed almost thirty veteran, albeit unevenly equipped, divisions in strong positions along the north slopes of the Apennines, with further defensive belts along the Po River and along the southern slopes of the Alps. The Allies mustered the equivalent of twenty well supplied and ably supported divisions. After a diversionary American attack up the Ligurian Coast on 5 April, Allied divisions of the British Eighth Army attacked on 9 April to seize the Argenta Gap outflanking the Comacchio Lagoon. On 14 April the Americans began their main attack towards the vital transportation hub of Bologna. After four days of fierce fighting amidst carefully prepared defensive positions the German line cracked. Once clear of the rugged Apennines, the open terrain of the Po Valley gave Allied mechanization and air power huge advantages. Allied columns swept forward through a retreating enemy disorganized by nearly continuous bombing and shelling. Over 100,000 were captured south of the Po River, and the Allies forced the Po in several places on 24 April. Punching through the largely unmanned defenses of this second belt, the Allies raced on to breach the Alpine defenses before the Germans could effectively man them. On 26 April the Americans captured Verona, blocking escape routes through the Brenner Pass and compromising the potentially formidable Adige River line. Elsewhere Allied columns swept on across the Po Valley and into the Alps. The Germans in Italy formally surrendered on 3 May. On 4 May the 88th Infantry Division advancing north through the Brenner Pass met the 103rd Infantry Division advancing south from Austria at Vipiteno. The European and Mediterranean Theaters had linked up.
244 | Event: Berlin Offensive | Date: 1945-04-16 | Tag: invasions, battles, wwii | Description: By 16 April 1945 the Soviets had reconstituted from previous offensives and built up massive forces along the line described by the Oder and Neisse Rivers. Meanwhile the western Allies had forced the Rhine and were attacking deep into Germany. General Dwight D. Eisenhower, recognizing that Berlin lay well within territory ceded to Soviet control at the Yalta Conference, halted forces under his command at the Elbe River and drove north and south to consolidate control over Germany west of the Elbe. On 16 April well equipped and supplied Soviet forces numbering over 2,500,000 attacked on a broad front. Opposing them were perhaps 750,000 ill equipped and poorly supplied Germans, many of them hastily raised levies of the young, old and disabled. The Germans put up a stout defense in prepared positions along the Seelow Heights, but the Soviets ground through these and drove on. By 25 April converging Soviet columns surrounded the city and pushed on to the Elbe, isolating Berlin behind an ever more formidable ring of Soviet troops. Savage fighting progressed from building to building while tons of artillery rained down on the city. By 30 April the Soviets had seized the famous Reichstag itself. Organized resistance disintegrated. Breakout attempts, some of which succeeded, oriented on moving far enough west to surrender to the western Allies rather than on defeating the Soviets. Adolph Hitler and Joseph Goebbels committed suicide. Battered remnants surrendered the city on 2 May. Soviet losses exceeded 360,000, while the Germans lost 320,000 killed or wounded. Over 480,000 Germans marched into captivity.
245 | Event: China Offensive Campaign | Date: 1945-05-05 | Tag: invasions, operations, wwii | Description: By the spring of 1945 Japan had been heavily defeated at sea and was reeling from losses in Burma, the Philippines and on Pacific islands. They still had powerful ground forces in China, which remained relatively unaffected by losses elsewhere and controlled the eastern third of the country. For years the American presence in China had been a handful of military and naval advisors and logisticians and a small but potent air force. The Chinese were divided among themselves, with a Nationalist government in Chungking, a communist government in Yenan and warlords elsewhere eyeing each other as warily as they eyed the Japanese. In late 1944 and early 1945 the Japanese undertook further offensives, sweeping away a number of airfields used by the Americans, capturing the rail line from Changsha to Hong Kong, and seizing full control of Indochina from residual Vichy French. Benefiting from a much improved flow of supplies from Burma, the Americans expanded advisory efforts to prioritize thirty-six Nationalist Chinese "Alpha" divisions and reinforced their air forces in China. On 13 April 1945 the Japanese attacked to seize a vital airfield at Chihchiang, the Fourteenth Air Force"s largest forward base south of the Yangtze River. Its capture would lay open approaches to Kunming and Chungking. Refurbished Chinese forces supported by American air power contained this offensive, and then counterattacked near Wu-yang on 5 May. The counterattack was successful, and forced a Japanese withdrawal with a series of flanking moves. Meanwhile the Japanese, alarmed by events on Okinawa and American Pacific advances, resolved to evacuate most of China south of the Yangtze River and to shift forces to the defense of their home islands. The Chinese followed up the Japanese withdrawal. Soon atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima (6 August) and Nagasaki (9 August) and the Soviet Manchurian Offensive (9-22 August) forced a general Japanese surrender.
246 | Event: German Surrender | Date: 1945-05-07 | Tag: surrender, wwii | Description: As Allied offensives overwhelmed Germany, German forces cut off in Italy, Berlin, the Netherlands, northwest Germany, Denmark and the fortress city of Breslau surrendered separately. Italian dictator Benito Mussolini was executed by partisans on 28 April, and Hitler committed suicide on 30 April. Hitler had appointed Admiral Karl Doenitz as President and Joseph Goebbels as Chancellor of Germany, but Goebbels committed suicide as well. Doenitz attempted to surrender to the western Allies only, but General Dwight D. Eisenhower rejected this overture. On 7 May the Chief of Staff of the German Armed Forces High Command, General Alfred Jodl, signed documents at Eisenhower"s headquarters in Rheims unconditionally surrendering all German forces. The surrender was to be effective 2301 hours on 8 May. The following day General Wilhelm Keitel signed similar documents in Berlin explicitly surrendering to Soviet forces. The western Allies celebrated "V-E Day" on 8 May, and the Soviets on 9 May. Much remained to be done with respect to disarming and processing Axis soldiers, liberating and repatriating prisoners of war and slave laborers, assisting refugees, establishing Allied control, redefining borders and re-establishing civil government. Although these and other issues were addressed at the Potsdam Conference (17 July " 2 August, 1945), closure was not fully achieved until the Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany signed in Moscow on 12 September 1990.
247 | Event: United Nations Charter Signed | Date: 1945-06-26 | Tag: conferences, developments, wwii | Description: At least since the International Peace Conference of 1899 in The Hague, nations had sought collective solutions to resolve conflicts, avoid wars, and codify rules for warfare when it occurred. The League of Nations founded after World War I had some successes, but failed to prevent World War II. During World War II the Allies resolved to construct a more comprehensive and potent international organization. In 1945 representatives from fifty nations, drawing upon earlier deliberations at Dumbarton Oaks, met in San Francisco at the United Nations Conference on International Organization to draft a charter for this new institution. The resulting United Nations Charter was signed on 26 June. The United Nations was formally established on 24 October after most of the signatories, to include China, France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States, had ratified the Charter.
248 | Event: Alamagordo Atomic Test | Date: 1945-07-16 | Tag: developments, wwii | Description: In September 1942 the United States committed to the highly secretive Manhattan Project to build an atomic bomb. This capitalized upon earlier private, Allied, and United States Government initiatives, and competed with less well resourced German, Japanese and Soviet efforts towards the same purpose. By the summer of 1945 the United States designed, gathered the materials for and built bombs based on both U235 and plutonium 239 featuring different triggering mechanisms. On 16 July it tested a plutonium bomb with an implosion firing mechanism on the Alamogordo Bombing and Gunnery Range in New Mexico. The test, code named Trinity, proved a huge success, and resulted in an explosion the equivalent of 20,000 tons of TNT with a shock wave felt over a hundred miles away. The Atomic Era had arrived.
249 | Event: Potsdam Conference | Date: 1945-07-17 | Tag: conferences, wwii | Description: At the Yalta Conference (4-11 February 1945) the Allies resolved to divide Germany into occupation zones, shift Poland"s borders to the Oder River in the west and the Curzon Line in the east, prosecute Nazi war criminals, impose reparations and further establish a post-war settlement for Europe. Meeting in Potsdam, Prime Ministers Winston L. S. Churchill and Clement Atlee (his successor) of the United Kingdom, President Harry S. Truman of the United States (President Franklin D. Roosevelt had died on 12 April) and General Secretary of the Communist Party Joseph Stalin of the Soviet Union followed up on these commitments. By that time Germany had surrendered unconditionally, the Soviets occupied much of Eastern Europe, and the United States had the Atomic Bomb. The Allies affirmed the borders of their occupation zones and of Poland, and accepted the expulsion of German civilians beyond the new Polish borders. German wartime annexations were reversed, provoking further expulsions in places. An Allied Control Commission took up issues of economic reorganization and reparations. Much to the chagrin of Poles fighting in the west, the Allies recognized the Soviet backed Lublin government of Poland. Following the conference, the Potsdam Declaration defined terms of surrender for Japan. Closure was not achieved with respect to some European issues until the Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany was signed in Moscow on 12 September 1990.
250 | Event: Hiroshima | Date: 1945-08-06 | Tag: attacks, developments, wwii | Description: Following the Potsdam Conference (17 July " 2 August 1945) the Allies issued the Potsdam Declaration, presenting Japan with an ultimatum and defining terms of surrender. The Japanese government ignored the ultimatum. President Harry S. Truman resolved to drop an Atomic Bomb, newly proven at the Alamogordo Atomic Test (16 July), on a Japanese city to force an expedient surrender. Manhattan Project planners recommended Hiroshima because it featured significant military targets in a large but relatively undamaged urban area wherein terrain would enhance the effects of the blast. Truman and others hoped the psychological effects would be so dramatic that surrender would come quickly and an invasion of Japan, with hundreds of thousands of American and millions of Japanese casualties, would be unnecessary. At 0815 hours on 6 August the B-29 bomber Enola Gay, accompanied by two other B-29s of the 509th Composite Group, dropped a gun-type fission U-235 bomb on Hiroshima. The city was instantly devastated; about 70,000 died immediately and another 70,000 died within the year from injuries, burns and radiation. When the Japanese did not immediately respond another B-29, Bock"s Car, from the 509th Composite Group dropped an implosion-type plutonium 239 bomb over Nagasaki at 1101 hours on 9 August. Again the effects were devastating.
251 | Event: Soviet Manchurian Offensive | Date: 1945-08-09 | Tag: invasions, attacks, wwii | Description: At the Teheran Conference (28 November - 1 December 1943) Soviet leader Joseph Stalin committed to enter the war against Japan once the fighting in Europe was over. From that point the Soviets built up their capabilities in the Far East, and radically accelerated this build up after the German surrender in May 1945. By 9 August 1945 the Soviets had amassed over 1,685,000 men, 28,000 artillery pieces, 5,000 tanks and 5,000 aircraft organized in three fronts west, north and east of Japanese held Manchuria. The Japanese deployed perhaps half of this manpower, and were far less well equipped. Many of their best troops had been withdrawn for the defense of the home islands, and were replaced in part by raw levies. The Soviets were trained and equipped for, and amply experienced in, high intensity maneuver warfare. The Japanese in Manchuria were largely light infantry who had been bogged down in counter-insurgency for years. The Japanese fortified likely avenues of approach, but the Soviets attacked on broad fronts with converging axes to bypass the most formidable defenses. In particular their daring attack through the Greater Khingan Mountains caught the Japanese by surprise. The Japanese intended to trade space for time and withdraw gradually into southeast Manchuria before counter-attacking, but rapidly moving Soviet columns intercepted or overran them before they could get away, and quickly penetrated subsequent positions as well. The Soviets swept through Manchuria and amphibiously landed in North Korea, on Sakhalin and in the Kurile Islands. Fighting sputtered to a halt with the Japanese Surrender (14 August - 2 September).
252 | Event: Japanese Surrender | Date: 1945-08-14 | Tag: surrender, operations, wwii | Description: Following the Potsdam Conference (17 July " 2 August 1945) the Allies issued the Potsdam Declaration, presenting Japan with an ultimatum and defining terms of surrender. The Japanese government ignored the ultimatum. Shortly thereafter President Harry S. Truman ordered the dropping of the Atomic Bomb on Hiroshima (6 August), and Joseph Stalin abandoned his Neutrality Pact with Japan and launched the Soviet Manchurian Offensive (9-22 August). Japan"s senior leaders, already reeling from huge defeats elsewhere, relentless American bombing, and the virtual destruction of their fleet and merchant marine, were stunned by these twin blows. They nevertheless split between those willing to accept the terms of the Potsdam Declaration subject to the survival of the Emperor, and those favoring a desperate final battle in the home islands to force more favorable terms. On 9 August the Americans dropped a second atomic bomb on Nagasaki, and on 10 August Japanese Emperor Hirohito committed decisively to the faction seeking immediate peace. Over the next several days diplomatic traffic attempted to resolve the future status of the Emperor, Japanese hard liners attempted a coup that failed, and the Americans launched their most massive conventional air raids yet. On 14 August the Japanese committed to surrender within the terms of the Potsdam Declaration, and on 15 August Emperor Hirohito made a recorded broadcast to that effect to the Japanese people. Resistance dragged on in isolated outposts while the word got out, and the Soviets continued their advances until the formal surrender ceremony on board the battleship U.S.S. Missouri in Tokyo Bay on 2 September.
253 | Event: Nuremberg Trials | Date: 1945-11-20 | Tag: trials, wwii | Description: An underlying premise of the Atlantic Charter was international cooperation to prevent wars of aggression and crimes against humanity. Mechanisms for enforcement seemed necessary. In 1945 the major Allied powers of World War II began a series of military tribunals to prosecute prominent members of the military, political and economic leadership of defeated Nazi Germany. The first trial (the Trials of the Major War Criminals) began at the Palace of Justice in Nuremberg, Germany (considered the symbolic birthplace of the Nazi Party) on November 20th 1945. The trial was held before an International Military Tribunal that included judges from the United States, Great Britain, the Soviet Union and France. Facing trial were the most important captured leaders of the Third Reich, including Hermann Goring, Karl Donitz, Hans Frank, Alfred Jodl, Ernst Kaltenbrunner, Wilhelm Keitel, Joachim Von Ribbentrop, Alfred Rosenberg, Albert Speer, Julius Steicher, Fritz Sauckel, Wilhelm Frick, and Martin Borman. Adolf Hitler, Heinrich Himmler and Joseph Goebbels had committed suicide before the war ended. The International Military Tribunal handed down verdicts against these major war criminals on October 1, 1946. Eleven of the defendants were sentenced to death. Three were acquitted. Three received life sentences. The remainder received sentences ranging from ten to twenty years in prison. Martin Bormann was sentenced to death in absentia. A second and third series of trial held at Nuremberg prosecuted lesser Nazi war criminals and organizations, including doctors and judges. These ended in 1949. Although criticized on various grounds, the Nuremburg Trials did establish a precedent of individual accountability under international law for wars of aggression and crimes against humanity. This precedent provided justification for today"s International Criminal Court.
